Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FAM-01 
Version 01 
 
 
 
SCHOOL PARENT COUNCILS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Boston Public Schools values the voices of families and seeks to 
engage families in both school governance and in an advisory 
capacity at all levels throughout the district. School Parent 
Councils (SPCs) serve as advocates and advisors to 
principals/heads of school, school superintendents, the 
superintendent, and the School Committee.  
SPCs provide an opportunity for families to be more deeply 
engaged at the school level, partnering with the principal/head of 
school to improve school culture and outcomes for all students. 
In addition to the school-based SPC, there are districtwide parent 
advisory councils that bring together parents across schools to 
serve as advisors to district leadership. The Citywide Parent 
Council (CPC) serves as the districtwide voice for parents and is 
composed of representatives from each school. The Special 
Education Parent Advisory Council (SPED PAC) represents the 
families of students with disabilities who receive special 
education services. The District English Learner Advisory 
Committee (DELAC) works to ensure that parents are informed 
about all aspects of BPS that affect English learners and provide 
recommendations to the Office of English Learners. These groups 
serve to empower parents and partner with BPS to improve 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
outcomes for all students. This circular focuses on the role and 
function of the SPC. 
SCHOOL PARENT COUNCILS 
The SPC is the independently established "voice" of all parents in 
the school community. The SPC advocates for students and the 
school, meets frequently and consistently, elects representatives 
to sit on the School Site Council (SSC), and promotes an 
environment of understanding and common purpose among 
parents, students, and school staff, with a focus on student 
learning and school improvement. For the purposes of this 
circular, the term “parent” includes a legal guardian or other 
person standing in loco parentis (such as a grandparent or 
stepparent with whom the child lives, or a person who is legally 
responsible for the child's welfare)." Sect. 9101(31) ESEA. 
The roles and responsibilities of the SPC are as follows: 
Roles: 
• Collaborate with school staff to create a welcoming school 
climate for all students and families. 
• Coordinate school-wide activities and events that engage 
families in student learning.  
• Raise funds to support school-based initiatives, activities, 
and events. 
Responsibilities: 
• Provide a safe forum for families to express concerns. 
• Contribute to school-based initiatives related to school 
improvement, school climate, and student learning. 
 
All parents or legal guardians of a child attending a particular 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
school are automatically members of that school’s SPC.  
The SPC Executive Committee is the elected leadership of the 
SPC. Schools must adhere to the following guidelines for the 
election of the Executive Committee: 
• OFCA recommends that the school’s Family Liaison is either 
the facilitator, co-facilitator, or observer of the election. 
• Elections for SSC and SPC parent reps must happen in the 
fall of the new school year. Spring elections will no longer be 
accepted. This is to help make opportunities for 
engagement in the councils more equitable.  
• Elections for the 2024-2025 school year may be conducted 
in person, virtually, or through a hybrid system, providing for 
equitable access to voting. 
• Parents/legal guardians who wish to become members of 
the Executive Committee must have a child enrolled at the 
school in which they are running.  
• Co-chairs and officers should be representative of the school 
community. 
• Any parent/legal guardian who is present at an SPC election 
(held in person or virtually) may be nominated for the SPC 
Executive Committee (a parent may nominate themself). 
• Within one school, elected members can serve more than 
one role only if there is an insufficient number of candidates 
to fill all roles. 
• Parents/legal guardians who are not present (in-person or 
virtually) at the time of the election may not be nominated. 
• Parents/legal guardians who work at their child’s school 
may not be elected to the SPC Executive Committee, except 
for extenuating circumstances. 
• Each family is allowed one vote per family. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
• Each candidate should be allowed one minute to introduce 
themself. 
• Elections may be carried out by secret ballot or can be 
approved by a majority vote of the present group. 
• Nominations and elections are held during the same 
meeting; therefore, voters must be present, virtually or in 
person, to participate in the election.  
 
SPC EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 
The role of the SPC Executive Committee is to: 
• Provide leadership and to organize the work of the SPC . 
• Maintain ongoing communication with all parents to ensure 
that they are connected to what is happening at school. 
• Maintain ongoing communication and a collaborative 
working relationship with the principal/head of school, 
teachers, school staff, and community partners. 
• Create an inclusive environment on the SPC and in the 
whole school community that welcomes the active 
participation of all parents. 
• Set a schedule and format of meetings that invites 
maximum participation of families. 
 
The composition of the SPC Executive Committee should:  
• Reflect the racial and ethnic diversity of the student body. 
• Include parents of students who are English Learners  
• Include parents of students who receive special education 
services. 
• Include parents of students in a range of grade levels.  
• Include a mix of newly elected and experienced parent 
leaders.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
 
Parents may serve in more than one SPC Executive Committee 
role simultaneously at the same school if no other candidates 
come forward. However, SPCs are encouraged to elect as many 
parents as possible for the various roles for the purposes of 
sharing responsibility and building leadership capacity. The SPC 
Executive Committee consists of the following roles: 
Co-Chair  
• Number elected: 2  
• Schedule and facilitate SPC meetings 
• Create agendas  
• Maintain ongoing two-way communication with 
principal/head of school 
Treasurer 
• Number elected: 1-2  
• Maintain clear and accurate financial records for the SPC  
• Provide monthly expense reports 
• Lead or manage SPC fundraising efforts  
Secretary 
• Number elected: 1-2  
• Conduct outreach to the parent community  
• Record and share meeting notes with the school 
community 
 
School Site Council Reps  
• Number elected: 5-8 (based on the number of staff in the 
BTU bargaining unit) 
• Represent the parent community as a member of the SPC 
• Participate in school-based decision-making 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
• Attend SPC meetings to report out on SSC business and 
receive information to bring back to the SSC 
• Facilitate communication between the SPC and SSC 
 
Citywide Parent Council Rep 
• Number elected: 1-2* 
 
• Participate in a districtwide parent group designed to 
advocate for BPS families and students and influence BPS 
policy 
Special Education Parent Advisory Council Rep 
• Number elected: 1-2* 
• Participate in a citywide parent organization designed to 
provide information and resources to families of students 
with disabilities who receive special education services  
District English Learners Advisory Committee 
 
• Number elected: 1-2* 
• Participate in a citywide committee tasked with providing 
recommendations to school and district officials regarding 
programs and services provided to EL students 
Total # of Parents Elected to SPC Executive Committee: 12-20 
 
*If vacant, this position should be revisited throughout the school 
year, and families should be reminded of the opportunity and 
the benefit of representation on these citywide councils.  
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SCHOOL PARENT COUNCIL AND 
SCHOOL SITE COUNCIL 
The School Parent Council (SPC) elects parent members to 
represent the parent voice on the School Site Council (SSC). SSC 
representatives are members of the SPC Executive Committee 
and should attend SPC meetings to provide regular updates on 
SSC proceedings to ensure opportunities for parent input and 
feedback. All SSC meetings are open to the public; therefore, any 
parent, staff person, or community member can attend. However, 
only the elected representatives can vote on SSC decisions. 
SCHOOL PARENT COUNCIL BY-LAWS 
All SPCs must develop by-laws for their council to provide 
structure and guidance for SPC operations. SPCs must annually 
review and approve their by-laws at their first meeting following 
the election. The by-laws are a public document and should be 
made available to all parents and members of the school 
community, upon request. The SPC by-laws should be submitted 
to the Office of Family and Community Advancement (OFCA) 
upon approval by the SPC.  
SCHOOL PARENT COUNCIL MEETINGS 
The SPC should meet at least once monthly. The first meeting of 
the year should include a presentation from the principal/head of 
school on the school’s goals for the year and election of 
representatives to the Executive Committee and School Site 
Council (see Superintendent’s Circular FAM-02 for more details). 
The following meeting should focus on sharing the work that the 
SPC is doing and provide the opportunity for feedback from 
parents. SPCs are encouraged to meet monthly, in keeping with 
the SSC frequency, to ensure that the parent body is kept 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
abreast of SSC activity. Meeting frequency and purpose should 
be detailed in the SPC By-laws. 
SPC GUIDELINES FOR PRINCIPALS, HEADS OF SCHOOL, AND 
ADMINISTRATORS 
• The principal/head of school must work with the SPC to host 
an annual Title I meeting to share with families (1) how the 
school is investing its Title I allocation, (2) rights and 
responsibilities of Title I parents, and (3) to seek feedback 
and/or input from parents on the Home-School Compact 
and Family Engagement Plan. 
• The principal/head of school should meet with the SPC on a 
regular basis to provide updates on school policies, the 
instructional focus, school data, other pertinent information, 
and to address school-wide parent concerns. 
• The principal/head of school should provide families with 
periodic updates on overall student/school progress, sharing 
data at SPC meetings.  
• The principal/head of school should meet with the SPC co-
chairs for ongoing communication regarding family and 
student engagement practices, student learning, and school 
improvement.  
• The principal/head of school should work with the SPC co-
chairs to have information translated into the home 
languages represented at their school and ensure that 
arrangements for translation and interpretation have been 
negotiated and agreed upon by the SPC and school staff 
(this includes election night). 
• The principal/head of school or designee should assist the 
SPC in notifying families of all SPC and/or Executive 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
Committee meetings, by providing access to a computer, 
paper, copying machine, and postage; and by working with 
the SPC for timely dissemination of notices for the entire 
community using a range of communication methods, 
including School Messenger, email, the school’s website, 
and school media.  
The SPC works collaboratively with the principal/head of school 
and school staff to solve problems and develop plans to improve 
the engagement of families and students. The commitment to 
partnering with families reflects the value that BPS has placed on 
the engagement of families and is grounded in decades of family 
engagement research. 
ALIGNMENT WITH PRINCIPAL/HEAD OF SCHOOL EVALUATION 
Effective implementation and the authentic engagement of 
parent, teacher, and student voice align with the following 
standards of the Massachusetts Administrator Evaluation rubric: 
• Indicator III-A1. Family Engagement 
o Engages parents, students, and teachers in creating a 
welcoming school environment and fostering a shared 
responsibility engagement. 
• Indicator IV-B1. Policies and Practices  
o Creates opportunities for authentic parent, student, 
and teacher voice in school-based decision-making.  
• Indicator IV-E-1. Shared Vision Development 
o Parents, students, and teachers have an opportunity to 
shape the vision for the school as it pertains to 
instruction and school climate. 
• Indicator IV-F-3. Consensus Building  


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
o Decisions are made using a consensus model, in which 
all members of the SSC (including SPC members) have 
an equal voice. 
o Resolves conflicts among members of the school 
community. 
IMPORTANT DATES  
Date 
Activity 
September 15 
Election dates submitted to OFCA 
October 31 
Deadline for completing SPC elections of all 
parent reps, including SSC representatives; and 
submitting rosters to OFCA. 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Family School Engagement 
Practices 
Department: 
Office of Family and Community 
Advancement 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-7750 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


