Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FAM-07 
Version 01 
 
 
HOME-SCHOOL COMPACT 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
OVERVIEW  
The Home-School Compact is a document that clarifies what 
school staff and families, working in collaboration, can do to help 
children reach high specific academic goals in core content 
areas. At their best, compacts link family engagement to school-
wide and grade level instructional goals and help ground the 
relationships between teachers and families in student learning.  
Additionally, the compact serves as a clear reminder of the 
shared responsibility of the school and home to ensure that 
children can learn what is required of them. It is a written 
commitment indicating how all members of a school community 
— families, teachers, principals, students, and concerned 
community members — agree to share responsibility for student 
learning. 
All schools receiving Title I funds are required to develop a 
home-school compact annually. 
WHAT IS INCLUDED IN A HOME-SCHOOL COMPACT? 
The compact should clearly communicate the following: 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-07 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 
1. Schoolwide instructional goals in core content areas and 
culturally and linguistically sustaining practices 
2. Specific learning goals for each grade level 
3. Key instructional strategies that the school plans to employ 
4. Specific strategies for families to support student learning at 
home 
5. How stakeholders, especially families, are involved in 
developing and revising the compact. 
Additionally, the compact provides a vehicle for clearly defining 
the expectations and shared responsibility for educating 
students. 
The compact must describe how the school and teacher agree to 
be responsible for:  
● Providing high-quality instruction for all students 
● Creating a supportive learning environment 
● Describing how school/teacher will build student agency in 
their learning 
● Showing respect for students and their families 
● Communicating with families and students about student 
progress. 
The compact must describe how families agree to be responsible 
for:  
● Supporting their children’s learning in school and out of 
school 
● Seeing that their children attend school regularly and on 
time 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-07 
Page 3 of 6 
 
 
● Participating in decisions relating to the education of their 
child and the school 
● Communicating with teachers on a regular basis. 
The compact must describe specific ways students agree to be 
responsible learners with the support of their parent(s) and 
teacher(s) by: 
● Attending school regularly and on time 
● Showing respect for themselves, their school, and other 
people 
● Believing they can and will learn 
● Trying to do their best in their work. 
The compact must emphasize the importance of ongoing, two-
way communication between home and school through the 
following minimum requirements:  
● Annual parent-teacher conference(s) to discuss the 
relationship between the compact agreements and the 
student’s achievement  
● Frequent, timely progress reports to families  
● Reasonable access to school staff in a variety of ways  
● Opportunities to participate in and observe class activities. 
DEVELOPING AND REVIEWING THE HOME-SCHOOL COMPACT  
The following are key considerations for developing your home-
school compact: 
1. The compact must be developed by a committee consisting 
of administrators, school staff, families, students, and 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-07 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 
teachers. Existing school-based family engagement action 
teams or a subcommittee of the School Site Council are 
options for the development of this document.  
2. The process for developing a compact should be open and 
inclusive, soliciting the input and contributions of a wide 
range of stakeholders. 
3. The compact provides an opportunity for each stakeholder 
to articulate their expectations regarding the delivery of 
teaching and learning and what they agree to be held 
accountable for regarding student achievement. 
4. The compact should be written in clear, family-friendly 
language, and translated into the languages spoken at the 
school.  
5. The compact should be written using the Racial Equity 
Planning Tool. 
6. Once a draft of the compact has been developed, families, 
teachers, and students should be given an opportunity to 
provide feedback and input. 
7. The final version of the document must be approved by the 
School Site Council annually in the spring in preparation for 
the upcoming school year. 
8. A final version of the compact must be submitted to the 
Office of Family and Community Advancement by  
October 31, 2024. 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-07 
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
USING THE HOME-SCHOOL COMPACT  
Schools must also develop a process for utilizing the compact to 
frame the relationships between teachers and families. Examples 
include: 
● The compact is reviewed at the beginning of parent-teacher 
conferences to frame the conversation about student 
progress and mutual accountability. 
● The compact is used throughout the year to frame 
conversations between teachers and families related to 
monitoring student progress toward specific learning goals. 
● The compact is used to frame school-based workshops 
designed to help families understand schoolwide and 
grade-level learning goals and how to support learning at 
home. 
ALIGNMENT WITH EDUCATOR EVALUATION 
The compact, if it is developed and used effectively and 
consistently, can be used as evidence of reaching the proficiency 
targets for the elements and indicators of Standard III in both the 
administrator and teacher evaluation rubrics.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION AND SUPPORT 
For additional information on home-school compacts, please see:  
● ESEA Title I, Part A, Section 1118(d)  
● www.ctsschoolparentcompact.org  
● Title I Toolkit 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-07 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 
The Office of Family and Community Advancement is responsible 
for supporting schools with the development and 
implementation of the compacts. 
IMPORTANT DATES  
Date 
Activity 
October 31 
Deadline for submitting current year Home-School 
Compact to Office of Family and Community 
Advancement 
May 31 
Deadline for School Site Council to review and 
approve the Home School Compact for the 
following school year 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Family School Engagement 
Practices  
Department: 
Office of Family and Community 
Advancement 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-7750 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent  


