Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FAM-05 
Version 01 
 
 
TITLE I FAMILY ENGAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
OVERVIEW 
Deepening partnerships with families is one of the key strategies 
for strengthening student learning and closing achievement 
gaps in the Boston Public Schools. Strong family and home-
school connection focused on student academic learning has 
consistently been shown to be associated with improved student 
achievement and school improvement. The shared responsibility 
that results from partnerships has the potential to improve 
relationships, strengthen schools, and ensure students are 
prepared to reach their educational potential in school and 
beyond. 
The BPS Five Core Elements of Engagement provide clear 
guidance for schools to develop and implement the Title I Family 
Engagement Requirements. Title I, Part A, Section 1118, of the 
Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) identifies 
specific family engagement practices required of all schools that 
receive Title I funds. The Office of Engagement provides oversight 
and support to ensure all schools that receive Title I funds meet 
the engagement requirements of Sec. 1118. 
 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-05 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
REQUIREMENTS OF SCHOOLS RECEIVING TITLE I FUNDS 
All schools receiving Title I Funds are required to do the following: 
1. Have a written Family Engagement Plan/Policy, developed 
in collaboration with parents and approved by the School 
Parent Council and School Site Council or Governing Board. 
2. Have a Home-School Compact, developed in collaboration 
with parents and approved by the School Parent Council 
and School Site Council or Governing Board. 
3. Set aside a minimum of 1% of Title I allocation in the school’s 
budget for family engagement. Decisions on how to allocate 
the 1% for family engagement must comply with federal 
guidelines and be made by the School Site Council or 
Governing Board. 
4. Host an annual parent meeting to discuss school priorities 
and programs under Title I by October 31.  
5. Build capacity of both families and teachers to effectively 
engage with one another to improve student learning 
outcomes. with an emphasis on the use of CRIOP, Pillar II. 
FAMILY ENGAGEMENT POLICY/PLAN 
The family engagement policy/plan is jointly designed by families 
and school stakeholders to describe how the school will carry out 
parent engagement to meet the changing needs of families, 
students, and the school. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-05 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
The Family Engagement Policy/Plan must:  
● Describe how parents will be engaged as equal partners in 
school-based decision-making, including tools they will use, 
such tools as School-based Equity Roundtables. 
● Describe how parents will be engaged in school 
improvement and student learning. 
● Identify strategies that the school will employ to build both 
parent and teacher capacity for partnering to support 
student learning. 
● Be shared with the school community in a format that is 
family friendly. 
● Be translated into families’ home languages. 
● Be updated annually to reflect the changing concerns of 
families’ and school priorities related to school climate and 
student learning. 
For additional information on the family engagement policy/plan, 
see ESEA Title I, Part A, Section 1118(b).  
HOME-SCHOOL COMPACT 
The purpose of the Home-School Compact is to establish shared 
responsibility for student academic achievement. 
For additional information on Home-School Compacts: 
● ESEA Title I, Part A, Section 1118(d)  
● BPS Circular FAM-7 Home-School Compacts 
● www.schoolparentcompact.org 
● Title I Toolkit 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-05 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
1% MINIMUM FAMILY ENGAGEMENT ALLOCATION 
All schools receiving Title I funds are required to set aside a 
minimum of 1% of the Title I allocation in the school's budget for 
family engagement. As needed, the Family School Engagement 
Practice team can provide guidance in allowable expenditures to 
schools. Decisions on how to allocate the 1% for family 
engagement should be made by the School Site Council or 
Governing Board in consultation with the parent body. 
For additional information on the use of Title I funds for family 
engagement, please see ESEA Title 1, Part A, Section1118(a)(3)(C) 
and Section 1118(e)(8), (9), and (10). 
ANNUAL MEETING 
Schools receiving Title I funds must convene an annual meeting 
with families in which: 
● All families are invited and encouraged to attend. 
● Families are informed of the school’s status as a Title I 
school. 
● The requirements of Title I are explained to families.  
● The school’s use and allocation of Title I funds is shared with 
families.  
● Families are informed of the different opportunities to be 
involved in school-based decision-making, school 
improvement, and supporting student learning. 
 
For additional information on the Annual Meeting as required 
under Title I, please see ESEA Title I, Part A, Section 1118(C)(1). 
CAPACITY BUILDING 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-05 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
Schools that receive Title I funds are required to provide capacity 
building opportunities for both families and educators designed 
to: 
● Help families understand learning standards, assessment of 
student learning, and how to effectively monitor student 
progress. 
● Strengthen families’ ability to support student learning at 
home. 
● Help principals/heads of school, teachers, and other school 
staff develop the mindsets, beliefs, skills, and strategies to 
effectively build relationships and maintain ongoing, two-
way, culturally appropriate communication with students’ 
families. 
● Collaborate with community-based organizations that work 
with school staff and/or parents to strengthen student 
learning outcomes. 
● Translate communications and provide interpretation from 
the school to families who speak a language other than 
English into the appropriate language. 
For additional information on the Title I requirements related to 
parent and teacher capacity building, please see ESEA, Title I, 
Part A, Section 1118(e). 
REPORTING  
To be considered in compliance with the family engagement 
requirements of Title I and the requirements of the BPS Core 
Elements of Engagement, schools must submit the following 
documents to the Office of Family and Community 
Advancement, or submit to their engagement folder: 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-05 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
● School-based Family Engagement Plan/Policy 
● Home-School Compact 
● Agenda, meeting minutes, election documents, meetings 
dates, roster, and bylaws of School Site Council 
● A self-assessment of the school’s engagement practices. 
 
The Office of Family and Community Advancement will be 
responsible for tracking parent participation in BPS Parent 
University, which builds the capacity of parents to effectively 
support student learning and advocate for student needs.  
ALIGNMENT WITH EDUCATOR EVALUATION 
The Title I Family Engagement requirements align with the 
educator evaluation Standard III: Family and Community 
Engagement addressing the continuum of supports that reflect 
shared expectations, responsibility, and opportunities for active 
participation and collaborative partnerships between schools, 
families, and community. Further, Title 1 requirements align with 
Culturally and Linguistically Sustaining Practices (CLSP), 
including the Culturally Responsive Instructional Observation 
Protocol (CRIOP). 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-05 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Family School Engagement 
Practices  
Department: 
Office of Family and Community 
Advancement 
Mailing Address: 
445 Warren Street, Roxbury, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-7750 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


