Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
OIIT-03 
Version 01 
 
TECHNOLOGY PURCHASING, DONATIONS &  
RETURN GUIDE 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
PURPOSE 
This document is intended to provide guidance on the 
technology purchasing process, acceptance of technology 
donations, and the return of technology.  
TECHNOLOGY PURCHASING 
All requests to procure technology that must be added to the 
BPS network should be submitted to BPSTechnology (OIIT) 
through the Technology Purchasing Request (Form 40), 
regardless of funding source. Please visit the BPSTechnology 
Purchasing Menu for technology options, pricing, and the 
request form. If you’re not sure if a request form should be 
submitted, please feel free to reach out.  
Technology listed on the menu has been evaluated by 
BPSTechnology (OIIT) experts based on industry standards, 
district priorities, and school needs. Most technologies come with 
the standard BPS image, and we guarantee service and support 
for the equipment. Competitive pricing has been negotiated with 
vendors, contracts are already in place, and BPS purchasing 
guidelines have been met.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-03 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
If you do not find what you are looking for on the menu, please 
reach out. While most technologies are standardized across the 
district, we may be able to get them with different specifications 
(i.e. memory, storage). If you are considering technology that 
cannot be supported by BPSTechnology (OIIT), please:  
• examine compatibility with existing systems and digital 
applications, 
• be conscious of any software licensing or subscriptions 
needed, 
• understand the warranty coverage and how repairs will be 
handled,  
• ensure training is available on use and integration of the 
technology,  
• arrange for shipment, delivery, assembly, and installation if 
necessary,  
• follow the procurement process (see Business Services 
Guide), and 
• plan ahead to meet implementation and procurement 
timelines. 
BPSTechnology (OIIT) reserves the right to decline requests for 
the procurement of technology.  
Before submitting your request, please be sure sufficient funding 
is available in technology accounts (55903, 55905, and 55907). If 
paying by check/BEDF, please wait to make payment. 
BPSTechnology (OIIT) will provide you with payment instructions 
once the request has been reviewed and approved. 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-03 
Page 3 of 5 
 
Only school/department leaders who are authorized by the 
superintendent to make budget decisions can submit requests 
to purchase technology. However, we encourage staff to work 
with leaders to make technology decisions that will benefit 
schools/departments as a whole. 
Public funds cannot be used to provide a prize or gift to an 
individual. Under the Anti-Aid Amendment of our State 
Constitution and by order of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial 
Court, money raised by taxation (i.e., public money) can be used 
only for public purposes and not for the advantage of private 
individuals. 
DONATIONS 
Schools receiving technology donations from outside vendors or 
partners should contact BPSTechnology (OIIT) prior to receipt for 
a comprehensive consultation. Donations can differ from 
BPSTechnology (OIIT) standards but must meet the minimum 
system requirements for the device. All donations of technology 
are the property of the Boston Public Schools and, as such, must 
adhere to the same policies regarding purchased equipment. 
After consultation, BPSTechnology (OIIT) reserves the right to 
decline donations if they do not meet the minimum system 
requirements or require additional support or resources beyond 
the means of the district. 
There may be additional costs associated with software, re-
imaging, repair, and maintenance. All donated computers must 
be re-imaged with the standard image before being used by 
students or staff to ensure that existing data/information can be 
removed, and the necessary security and management software 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-03 
Page 4 of 5 
 
can be installed.   
Materials funded through DonorsChoose.org are the property of 
the public school at which the teacher is employed when 
resources are shipped. The teacher who created the project is the 
sole steward of the donation while employed at the school, 
carrying out the project for which the materials were donated. 
For more information, go to DonorsChoose.Org Materials 
Ownership Policy. 
RETURNS 
All technology (laptops, desktops, cell phones, tablets, desk 
phones, etc.) must be returned to BPSTechnology (OIIT) for 
reimaging or recycling. Any BPSTechnology (OIIT) staff member 
at either the Bolling Building or Campbell Resource Center can 
collect technology and provide an electronic receipt to the 
employee and RC manager, if requested. If re-imaged, the device 
is held until the purchasing school/department reassigns the unit 
and/or provides us with further instruction.   
Technology cannot be transferred from one employee to another. 
All computers, phones, and tablets must be returned to 
BPSTechnology (OIIT) so that data can be properly archived and 
destroyed before it is redistributed to another employee. Hard 
drive contents will be archived according to the City of Boston 
Records Retention Schedule by the director of records 
management. Once data is archived and destroyed, the RC 
manager can direct BPSTechnology (OIIT) to redeploy the 
technology to another employee in their RC. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-03 
Page 5 of 5 
 
Name: 
Director of Technology Business Operations 
Department: 
OIIT / BPS Technology 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9190 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


