Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
OIIT-02 
Version 01 
 
 
 
PROCURING DIGITAL PRODUCTS GUIDANCE 
DOCUMENT 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
PURPOSE 
This document is intended to provide guidance to Boston Public 
Schools (BPS) staff on the process to procure new digital learning 
technologies that use student education records or staff 
information. The overarching guidance is that schools and central 
office departments should continue to use already-vetted digital 
products that are included with the Google Enterprise suite of 
tools or those that are included in Clever. 
DEFINITIONS 
Digital Tool - Any digital products or learning tools that are used 
to enhance or improve workflows that do not store or maintain 
data/information. Examples include applications like 
Smartsheets, Chrome Extensions, or personal notation tools. 
These tools are exempt from this circular. 
System - Any digital platform that purposely built to store, 
maintain, or transfer sensitive student or staff data/information. 
Examples include Aspen or EdPlan. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-02 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
 
Platform - A suite of tools and programs that allow users to 
create structures to maintain information. Examples include 
Google Apps, Salesforce, or Wordpress. 
Learning Application - Any digital tool used in a classroom 
setting that may contain content and student 
information/progress. Learning applications may fall into multiple 
categories, depending on how they are used, but any tool that 
contains content and tracks student learning should be 
considered a learning app for the purpose of this document. 
Examples include Imagine Learning. 
CONTEXT 
BPS staff seeking online learning products or receiving offers to 
use online learning products to support instruction in a digital 
space has resulted in the desire to use products that may not be 
aligned to BPS instructional standards, do not comply with our 
technical specifications, or do not adhere to data sharing 
guidelines under FERPA. Our district is committed to ensuring 
that appropriate educational supports and effective learning 
opportunities are provided to students. As such, this document 
will outline guidance for the appropriate review of digital 
learning tools in BPS. The guidelines outlined below are created 
to ensure that product confidentiality and security practices 
meet or exceed industry standards and adhere to the 
expectations contained in the federal Family Education Rights 
and Privacy Act (FERPA), the Children’s Online Privacy Protection 
Act (COPPA), the Protection of Pupil Rights Amendment (PPRA), 
and HIPAA regulations. This document describes the 
considerations schools and central office staff should employ 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-02 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
 
around protecting student data and education records, when 
selecting digital learning tools.  
GUIDANCE FOR BPS STAFF PROCURING DIGITAL PRODUCTS  
Any tools or products that are procured (paid for or free) by 
schools or departments for schoolwide or districtwide use need 
to comply with the FERPA school official exception criteria1 and 
specifications for technical interoperability. Exceptions are made 
for tools that do not track/store/maintain student or staff 
information. For example, a Chrome Extension that magnifies the 
screen does not fall under these guidelines since it will not be 
 
1 Performs an institutional service or function for which the 
educational agency or institution would otherwise use its own 
employees; 
Has been determined to meet the criteria set forth in in the 
educational agency’s or institution’s annual notification of 
FERPA rights for being a school official with a legitimate 
educational interest in the education records or PII; 
Is under the direct control of the educational agency or 
institution regarding the use and maintenance of the education 
records or PII; and 
Uses the education records or PII only for authorized purposes 
and does not re-disclose the education records or PII to other 
parties (unless the provider has specific authorization from the 
educational agency or institution to do so and it is otherwise 
permitted by FERPA). See 34 CFR §99.31(a)(1)(i). 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-02 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
 
accessing any sensitive information. New requests for products 
should: 
1. Meet the district’s technical specifications 
2. Have signed or sign a data privacy agreement  
3. Aligned to the Essentials for Instructional Equity  
4. Serve a purpose that is distinct from currently available tools 
within the district. 
PROCESS FOR SUBMITTING A SPENDING APPROVAL FOR THE 
DIGITAL LEARNING PRODUCT 
Before a new digital learning product will be integrated, the 
following steps need to be completed: 
1. Review the Essentials for Instructional Equity for alignment. 
2. Have the vendor submit an NDA Request to receive and sign 
the MA Student Data Privacy Agreement and Technology 
Specifications Template. 
3. Once fully executed, follow the procurement process as 
outlined in the BUSINESS SERVICES GUIDE. 
4. Once the product is procured, email the BPS Clever Admin 
at cleveradmin@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-02 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Director of Technology 
Department: 
Office of Instructional and Information 
Technology, Office of Data & Accountability 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9200 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


