Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PM02 
Version 01 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF INSTRUCTIONAL 
BASAS ADMINISTRATORS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version.. 
Heads of school, principals, and other administrative heads are 
responsible for evaluating the performance of administrators 
under their direct supervision. This employee group is school-
based, requires DESE licensure, and is represented as part of the 
BASAS bargaining unit. Instructional BASAS administrators will 
be evaluated using the VectorEvals platform as the evaluation 
instrument. As of September 2023, non-instructional BASAS 
administrators in roles that do not require DESE-licensure will be 
evaluated using Superintendent Circular HRS-PM02A 
Performance Evaluation of Non-Instructional BASAS 
Administrators. 
The purpose of this memorandum is to explain who is 
responsible for evaluation and to outline the philosophy, 
objectives, guidelines, and procedures applicable to that process. 
PHILOSOPHY 
The Boston Public Schools and the BASAS bargaining unit 
recognize that the quality of education provided depends upon 
the professional performance and the total job effectiveness of 
the teachers and administrators in the system.  Thus, since the 
system's professionals can and should be held accountable for 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 2 of 10 
 
the quality of their performance, a just and effective process for 
evaluating that performance is essential. Such a process must be 
organized to: 
• foster effective leadership in promoting improvements of 
schools and educational programs 
• develop in the professional staff a clearer understanding of 
the goals of education 
• promote sound organizational and management 
procedures 
• demonstrate active support of the policies of the School 
Committee and superintendent. 
The performance evaluation program to be implemented to 
satisfy this philosophy for administrators is diagnostic and 
prescriptive, is generally positively directed, and encourages 
professionals to maximize unique strengths and skills. 
All instructional BASAS administrators whose evaluations are 
subject to 603 CMR 35.00, et. seq. (i.e., administrators whose roles 
require DESE licensure) shall be evaluated on a cycle consistent 
with those regulations. Evaluees not subject to 603 CMR 35.00 et. 
seq. shall be evaluated annually, except that such employees 
need not be evaluated in the following year if they remain in the 
same job title and position unless the evaluator determines a 
need to do so. 
INSTRUMENTS/EVALUATORS 
A. Instructional BASAS members shall be evaluated by a 
designee of the superintendent outside the BASAS 
bargaining unit. 
B. The evaluation instrument to be used for instructional 
BASAS administrators in DESE-licensed roles as of 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 3 of 10 
 
September 2019 is known as VectorEvals. It is accessible via 
the employee’s BPS Google account. Comprehensive 
information pertaining to the performance evaluation of 
instructional BASAS administrators under the 2011 education 
regulation amendments (603 CMR 35.00) is now located at 
the Office of Human Resources website: 
https://www.bostonpublicschools.org/Page/8586. 
 
PROCEDURAL STEPS 
A. Preparation - No later than 30 days after the start of a rating 
year, and no later than 45 days after a change in a person’s 
evaluator, the person’s evaluator shall meet with the 
evaluee(s) for the purpose of explaining the diagnostic 
prescriptive evaluation program, reviewing the evaluation 
instrument and which parts of it may not be applicable, 
answering questions, and determining additional job 
related responsibilities which will be covered in the 
evaluation. Within 5 days after said meeting, the evaluee will 
receive a copy of a list of job related functions for which they 
are responsible and on which their performance will be 
evaluated. 
The evaluee may propose a professional practice goal as 
well as a student learning goal. All goals are subject to the 
approval of the evaluator. 
B. Data Gathering - It should be clearly understood by the 
evaluee that the data gathering process is ongoing and 
cumulative.  Evaluation data includes information gathered 
by observation or other means. Data should be collected 
over a sufficient period and should be accessible to the 
evaluee in compliance with applicable state and federal 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 4 of 10 
 
laws. All complaints or derogatory comments obtained from 
parents, community, etc., shall be promptly provided to the 
instructional BASAS member, or they may not be used as a 
basis for evaluation. 
The evaluator must provide feedback within five school days 
to the evaluee (via email or in person) after any observation 
or collection of evidence that results in the evaluator having 
a concern that one or more standards may be rated as 
unsatisfactory or needs improvement on a formative or 
summative evaluation for the first time. 
C. Post-Evaluation Conference - Evaluation reports may be 
filled out periodically throughout the school year whenever 
an evaluator determines that assistance, supervision, or 
intervention is deemed appropriate. Within ten (10) school 
days during which the BASAS member is present following 
the completion of each evaluation, the evaluator shall meet 
with the evaluee for the purpose of discussing the 
evaluation, providing an appraisal of professional strengths 
and areas in need of improvement. 
In any area where the evaluator indicates a need for 
improvement, or that the evaluee is “Unsatisfactory”, the 
evaluator will provide the evaluee with a written 
prescription. The prescription must be fully descriptive, 
instructive, reasonable, attainable, and educationally sound 
as to the specific remedy sought by the evaluator. 
At the post-evaluation conference, the evaluee will be 
shown their written evaluation by the evaluator and will sign 
it to indicate they have seen it and acknowledge that it will 
be placed in their personnel file, but not to indicate 
agreement or disagreement. A copy of the evaluation will be 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 5 of 10 
 
provided to the evaluee, and the evaluee will be allowed to 
attach comments to the evaluation. 
D. Follow-Up - In general, the number and scope of the 
subsequent conferences can be gauged at the first post-
evaluation conference and should be communicated to and 
discussed with the evaluee at the end of that conference. 
FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT/EVALUATION AND OBSERVATIONAL 
FEEDBACK 
A. A formative assessment shall be a part of the process used 
to assess progress towards attaining goals set forth in 
administrator plans, performance on Standards and 
Indicators of Effective Teaching Practice, or both, and may 
be used to inform employment decisions. This process may 
take place at any time during the cycle of evaluation, but 
typically takes place at mid-cycle. 
B. A formative evaluation shall be an evaluation conducted at 
the end of Year 1 for an administrator on a two-year self-
directed growth plan. This evaluation is to be used to arrive 
at a rating on progress towards attaining the goals set forth 
in the evaluee’s plan, performance on Standards and 
Indicators of Effective Teaching Practice, or both, and may 
be used to inform employment decisions. 
C. If an evaluee’s performance results in a rating of “Needs 
Improvement,” or “Unsatisfactory” on a formative 
assessment or evaluation, the evaluation prescription may 
contain a requirement that an administrator take advantage 
of additional professional development training or other 
opportunities. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 6 of 10 
 
SUMMATIVE EVALUATION AND REPORTS 
A. A summative evaluation is an evaluation used to arrive at a 
rating on each standard, an overall rating, and as a basis to 
make personnel decisions. The summative evaluation 
includes the evaluator’s judgments of the evaluee’s 
performance against performance standards and the 
evaluee’s attainment of goals set forth in the evaluee’s plan. 
B. During the entire evaluation process, continuous assistance, 
support, and encouragement should be extended to assist 
the evaluee in meeting established objectives. 
C. Continued failure to achieve an overall rating of “Proficient” 
will result in additional prescriptions, warnings, additional 
evaluations, and further personnel action, including 
evaluation visits from other School Department 
administrators. 
D. An evaluee whose overall performance has been judged as 
“Needs Improvement” or “Unsatisfactory” shall be notified in 
writing and shall meet directly with the evaluator. 
DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
A. An overall rating of “Unsatisfactory” on a summative 
evaluation for BASAS members shall be subject to the 
grievance and arbitration procedure. An administrator may 
grieve a summative rating of “Proficient” evaluation up to 
and including the level of the responsible administrator 
above the level of the evaluator. Any evaluation that is used 
or referred to as any part of the rationale for removal, 
reassignment, or any other negative action against an 
employee shall be subject to the grievance and arbitration 
procedures. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 7 of 10 
 
B. Any evaluation of an instructional BASAS administrator 
which is overall “Unsatisfactory” shall be promptly 
forwarded to BASAS along with any other recommended 
professional development or corrective action plan, 
provided that the BASAS member has so requested in 
writing. The superintendent’s designee and BASAS agree to 
meet to discuss the plan, when requested by the BASAS 
member. 
C. Alleged violations of the performance evaluation process are 
subject to the grievance and arbitration procedures if the 
employee has been dismissed. 
PROCEDURES FOR DISMISSAL/DEMOTION 
If the performance evaluation of an evaluee results in a 
recommendation for dismissal/demotion by the evaluator 
(confirmed by the head of school or other senior administrator), 
the following procedures will be followed: 
A. The superintendent's designee shall discuss each 
recommendation for dismissal with the appropriate 
evaluator and/or other senior administrator.  The 
superintendent's designee shall then undertake the 
necessary investigation to substantiate the evaluation of the 
administrator. 
Based on the above, the superintendent or their designee 
shall decide on the appropriateness of the recommendation 
for dismissal/demotion.  The evaluator and/or other senior 
administrator must present supporting documents to the 
Superintendent or their designee when presenting a 
recommendation for dismissal. 
B. The superintendent or their designee or senior 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 8 of 10 
 
administrator shall submit all processed recommendations 
for dismissal to the Office of Labor Relations. 
C. The decisions of the superintendent or their designee shall 
be confined to the following: 
1. Retention - This is a rejection of the recommendation 
of the evaluator based on the evidence presented on 
an individual administrator. 
2. Notice - The superintendent's designee, having 
reviewed the materials, decides that the case does not 
warrant a recommendation for dismissal/demotion, 
but instead warrants placing the administrator on 
notice that their performance is highly unacceptable.  
This status stands as a final warning that the 
administrator will be subject to additional evaluation 
during the academic year and, if performance is not 
improved, may be subject to dismissal/demotion. 
3. Dismissal/Demotion - This recommendation is the 
affirmation of the evidence presented by the evaluator. 
The evaluee may call for a hearing before the 
superintendent or designee thirty days after written 
notification to the administrator of the 
recommendation for dismissal/demotion. 
D. The Office of Labor Relations shall: (1) evaluate the evidence 
for dismissal/demotion; (2) review the recommendation, if 
necessary, with the evaluator and/or superintendent or their 
designee; and (3) determine that relevant procedures for 
evaluations were substantially complied with and that the 
evaluations warrant dismissal of the employee.  
E. The Office of Labor Relations shall forward its analysis to the 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 9 of 10 
 
superintendent of schools with copies to the principal leader 
or other senior administrator. 
F. The superintendent shall review the materials, make a 
decision, and give notice to the employee in accordance 
with G.L. c.71, Section 42. 
PROCEDURES FOR DISCIPLINE 
If a principal, head of school, or supervisor determines that an 
administrator has violated work rules, the supervisor should 
follow procedures outlined in Superintendent's Circular HRS-
PP10 Employee Discipline Procedures.  Additionally, the principal, 
head of school, or supervisor may consider the infraction in 
evaluating the administrator's overall performance. 
Failure to address job performance problems of assigned staff 
through the performance evaluation process represents 
unacceptable performance on the part of a supervisor. This 
problem is further compounded when "problem staff" are given a 
satisfactory rating by the supervisor and encouraged to transfer 
to another school/department.  Such failure on the part of a 
supervisor represents "unsatisfactory" administrative 
performance on the part of that person and they will be held 
accountable by the appropriate senior administrator and 
superintendent. 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 10 of 10 
 
Please refer in advance to Superintendent's Circular HRS-PP10 
Employee Discipline Procedures. 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
June 15 
Deadline for evaluators to submit 
evaluation to Instructional BASAS 
Administrators via VectorEvals 
platform.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Evaluation and Performance 
Management 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Boston, MA 
02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9627 
Email: 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org  
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


