Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
HRS-PP12 
Version 01 
 
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE LEAVE POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Boston Public Schools is committed to the health and safety of 
our employees and their families. This circular is intended to 
comply with applicable state laws (1 ) that are designed to protect 
victims of domestic violence. Should you or your family member 
be a victim of domestic violence or abusive behavior, you are 
encouraged to communicate with the Office of Human resources 
about the situation.   
Boston Public Schools must provide employees with up to 15 
days of time off in a 12-month period, if: 
• the employee or their family member is the victim of 
abusive behavior (such as domestic violence, stalking, sexual 
assault, or kidnapping); and 
• the purpose of the leave is to seek medical attention, 
counseling, secure housing, or obtain legal or other victim 
services directly related to the abusive behavior against the 
employee or family member of the employee. 
 
(1) Section 52E of Chapter 149 of the Massachusetts General Laws 
(Section 10 of Chapter 260 of the Acts of 2014) 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP12 
Page 2 of 3 
 
For purposes of this policy, a family member includes: 
• Married spouses 
• Persons "in a substantive dating or engagement 
relationship" AND who reside together  
• Persons having a child in common regardless of whether 
they have ever married or resided together 
• A parent, step-parent, child, step-child, sibling, grandparent, 
or grandchild 
• Persons in a guardianship relationship 
You are immediately eligible for this leave upon the beginning of 
your employment. Employees may use accrued sick, personal, 
and vacation time to remain in paid status during a covered leave 
under this policy.  If no accrued time is available, leave under this 
policy will be unpaid. 
We request that you provide appropriate advance notice of this 
leave (as required by the current leave policy), unless there is an 
imminent danger to your immediate health and safety (in which 
case, we must receive notification within 3 workdays that the 
leave was taken or is being taken for reasons covered by this 
policy). If you take this leave, please provide documentation 
evidencing that you or your family member has been a victim of 
domestic violence or abusive behavior within 30 days of the leave 
request. Such forms of documentation may include: 
• A court issued protective order 
• An official document from a court, provider, or public 
agency 
• A police report or statement of a victim or witness provided 
to the police 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP12 
Page 3 of 3 
 
• Official legal documentation attesting to perpetrator’s guilt 
• Medical documentation of treatment for the abusive 
behavior 
• A sworn statement from the employee attesting to being a 
victim of abusive behavior 
• A sworn statement from a professional who has assisted the 
employee or the employee's family, e.g., a counselor, social 
worker, health care worker, or member of the clergy. 
Perpetrators of domestic violence are not entitled to leave under 
this statute. 
Provided you have submitted proper documentation, your 
employment is protected for leave taken under this policy. If you 
have questions at any time as to how this policy applies to you, 
please do not hesitate to contact the Office of Human resources. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Employee Services – Leave of Absence Team 
Department: 
Office of Human resources 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9255 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
ohrleaves@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


