Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PM02A 
Version 01 
 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF  
NON-INSTRUCTIONAL BASAS ADMINISTRATORS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Document Purpose 
Purpose of Performance Management 
Evaluation Process Overview 
The Five-Step Process 
Step 1: Self-Assessment 
Step 2: Analysis, Goal setting, and Analysis 
Step 3: Implementation of the Plan 
Step 4: Formative Assessment  
Step 5: Summative Evaluation (June 15) 
Upward Feedback 
Evaluation Platform and Documentation 
Timeline and Tools 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 2 of 11 
 
 
 
Appendix A: Core Competencies 
Appendix B: Rating Levels 
Appendix C: Goal Status Scale 
DOCUMENT PURPOSE 
This document describes the performance management and 
evaluation process for Non-Instructional BASAS Administrators 
assigned to schools and central office departments. The purpose 
of this document is to provide clarity to employees and 
supervisors, as well as templates and tools for use during the 
process. Please refer to Circular HRS-PM02 - Performance 
Evaluation of Instructional BASAS Administrators for 
Instructional BASAS staff evaluation procedures. 
PURPOSE OF PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT 
Boston Public Schools (BPS) students are the citizens, leaders, 
scholars, entrepreneurs, advocates, and innovators of tomorrow. 
As a city and district, we must ensure that 100 percent of our 
students are prepared for college, career, and life in the 21st 
century. We must model our district and Central Office on the 
classroom we want to see. We have established a system of 
performance management to affirm the ideal that everyone, 
from students to the superintendent, must have sufficient 
resources, information, and support to achieve efficacy in their 
endeavors. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 3 of 11 
 
 
 
The fundamental purpose of performance management in BPS 
schools and Central Office is to maximize the productivity and 
impact of our employees by enabling them to perform at their 
fullest potential. Our approach is designed to provide high-
quality support to schools, students, and families in BPS to 
ensure our graduates are college, career, and life ready. To do so, 
our performance management system will: 
 
1. Establish a consistent set of competencies to clearly set and 
communicate expectations for employee performance. 
2. Align employee efforts with department and organizational 
goals. 
3. Create systems and structures that gather and monitor 
performance to support employee feedback, growth, and 
development. 
4. Identify areas of strength to leverage for increased impact, 
and areas of growth for providing targeted support. 
5. Provide accountability for individuals and enable them to 
see their contribution to and progress toward organizational 
goals. 
6. Connect employee performance to incentives, recognition, 
professional growth, and retention efforts. 
EVALUATION PROCESS OVERVIEW 
Non-instructional BASAS members may be evaluated by the 
team leader, responsibility center manager, supervisor, or their 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 4 of 11 
 
 
 
designee. The criteria for effective practice for non-instructional 
BASAS administrators are identified in the Core Competencies, 
which defines six categories listed below. See Appendix A for 
greater detail on the Core Competencies. 
1. Results Orientation 
2. Collaboration and Communication 
3. Job Knowledge and Skills 
4. Cultural Competency & Equitable Practices 
5. Responsiveness and Service Focus 
6. Leadership [for staff members supervising people or 
projects] 
 
Evaluations will result in goal 
ratings, competency ratings, 
and an overall performance 
rating, which will be based on 
the supervisor’s judgment on 
evidence of performance 
against the standards and 
progress toward goals. 
Progress toward goals will be 
rated as “Goal Achieved,” “Goal 
Significantly Met,” “Active 
Goal,” “Goal Not Met,” and “Goal Deferred.” Greater details 
on these rating levels can be found in Appendix B (at the 
end of this document). 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 5 of 11 
 
 
 
The five levels of performance which apply to performance on 
each competency and the overall performance rating shall be: 
“Highly Effective,” “Effective,” “Developing,” “Minimally Effective,” 
and “Ineffective.” Greater details on these rating levels can be 
found in Appendix B (at the end of this document). 
THE FIVE-STEP PROCESS 
Based on best practices in performance evaluation, BPS has 
adopted a five-step process for evaluation. This process should be 
followed each year by the employee and their supervisor. 
 
Step 1:  Self-Assessment (by September 1) 
The employee reviews available evidence of work performance, 
prior feedback and evaluations, and the Core Competencies to 
determine areas of strength and areas for further growth. The 
Self-Assessment is used to inform the employee’s goals and 
action plan for the upcoming year. 
Step 2: Analysis, Goal Setting, and Analysis (by October 1) 
Based on the employee’s self-assessment, job description, 
individual aspiration, and school/department goals, the employee 
and their supervisor establish 2-4 goals, related to professional 
practice or performance: 
● A professional practice goal relates to an identified skill or 
set of knowledge that an employee wants to develop or 
improve. When developing a professional practice goal, the 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 6 of 11 
 
 
 
employee and their supervisor should both look at past 
performance and feedback, as well as the employee’s 
professional/career aspirations. Professional practice goals 
should align to one or more of the Core Competencies. 
● A performance goal is a measurable target or outcome 
related to an employee’s work. Goals should align with an 
employee’s team and/or departmental goal(s). 
Step 3: Implementation of the Plan (ongoing) 
The employee performs job duties and responsibilities, 
implements the action steps toward goals, submits evidence 
supporting proficiency, and meets with their supervisor to 
receive and discuss feedback. The supervisor collects and reviews 
evidence, provides ongoing, timely, clear, and actionable 
feedback, and meets with the employee to give and discuss 
feedback, including recommendations for improvement, if 
applicable. 
Step 4: Formative Assessment (optional by February 1) 
Each employee should receive a formative assessment to provide 
the employee with formal feedback on their performance against 
the Core Competencies and their progress toward goals. 
Typically, the formative will occur midway through the 
assessment year, though may take place earlier for individuals in 
need of additional support. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 7 of 11 
 
 
 
Step 5: Summative Evaluation (June 15) 
Each employee shall receive a summative evaluation to provide 
the employee with formal feedback and ratings of their 
performance, and progress toward goals. 
Upward Feedback 
In this process, upward feedback from direct reports and school 
leaders (when applicable), as well as peer feedback, should be 
incorporated into an employee’s performance evaluation.  
EVALUATION PLATFORM AND DOCUMENTATION 
Beginning September 2023, non-instructional BASAS 
administrators’ evaluations and related documentation will be 
generated and stored in the BPS online performance 
management platform, VectorEvals. Employees and supervisors 
will receive training in accessing, navigating, and using the 
platform prior to the start of their evaluation cycle. Training 
modules will be available in an online, on-demand format to the 
employee and their supervisor for reference, as well. 
 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 8 of 11 
 
 
 
TIMELINE 
Date 
Activity 
July - August Office, team, and individual goal setting begins. 
Supervisors review of standards and expectations with 
employees. 
September 1 
Employee self-assessments due. 
Employee goals & action plans draft due. 
October 1 
Finalized employee goals & action plans due. 
Ongoing 
Employee check-ins, at the discretion of individual. 
Provide feedback (verbal and written) to employees on 
progress toward goals, observed performance, and 
work products/artifacts. 
Implementation also includes peer feedback. 
January 1 - 
February 1 
Formative assessment meetings with employees. 
February 1 
Formative assessments (optional) finalized and 
submitted. 
June 1  
Last day to submit artifacts for review prior to 
summative evaluation. 
June 15  
Summative evaluations finalized and submitted. 
APPENDIX A: THE CORE COMPETENCIES (LINK TO SEPARATE 
DOCUMENT) 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 9 of 11 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B: RATING LEVELS 
Effectiveness 
Level 
Description 
Highly Effective Performance far exceeded expectations due to 
exceptionally high quality of work performed in all essential 
areas of responsibility, resulting in an overall quality of work 
that was superior; and either 
included the completion of a major goal or project or 
made an exceptional or unique contribution in support of 
team, department, or district objectives. 
This level is achievable by any employee though given 
infrequently (<10% of employees). 
Effective 
Performance met expectations in all essential areas of 
responsibility, and the quality of work overall was excellent. 
Annual goals were met. 
Developing 
Performance consistently met expectations in all essential 
areas of responsibility, at times possibly exceeding 
expectations, and the quality of work overall was very good. 
The most critical annual goals were met. 
This level is expected for individuals who are new to the 
organization or to a role. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 10 of 11 
 
 
 
Minimally 
Effective 
Performance did not consistently meet expectations – 
performance failed to meet expectations in one or more 
essential areas of responsibility, and/or one or more of the 
most critical goals were not met.  A professional 
development plan to improve performance must be 
attached, including timelines, and monitored to measure 
progress. 
Ineffective 
Performance was consistently below expectations in most 
essential areas of responsibility, and/or reasonable progress 
toward critical goals was not made. Significant 
improvement is needed in one or more important areas. A 
plan to correct performance, including timelines, must be 
outlined and monitored to measure progress. 
 
 
APPENDIX C: GOAL STATUS SCALE 
Goal Status 
Description 
Goal Achieved 
All goal milestones and success measures have 
been achieved for 100% of goals. 
Goal Significantly 
Met 
All goal milestones and success measures have 
been achieved for at least 85% of goal. 
Active Goal 
The goal is still in progress, though some 
milestones may have been achieved. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 11 of 11 
 
 
 
Goal Not Met 
For this goal, some or all milestones and success 
measures have not been met. 
Goal Deferred 
For timing or organizational reasons, this goal has 
been deferred. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Evaluation and Performance 
Management 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Boston, MA 
02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9627 
E-mail: 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


