Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
School Year 2023-2024 
NUMBER: 
HRS-HS06  
Version 01 
 
 
SUBSTITUTE TEACHERS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
This superintendent’s circular sets forth information regarding 
the employment and professional development of substitute 
teachers.  
USE OF THE AUTOMATED BPS SMARTFIND EXPRESS SYSTEM 
(SUBCENTRAL) 
► All schools are required to use BPS SubCentral for substitute 
needs. This will allow the school's central administration to 
understand and better manage operations. This will also 
allow OHC to monitor and accurately report fill rates as well 
as recruit for hard-to-fill vacancies.  
The Office of Human Resources is committed to ensuring the 
active substitute pool consists of high-quality substitute teachers. 
BPS SubCentral allows principals and heads of schools to view 
and coordinate substitute activities and view past, current, and 
future jobs for the school, helping them to better understand and 
manage absenteeism.  
BPS SubCentral is available via the Internet and mobile app 24 
hours a day, 7 days a week, from any Internet-enabled computer 
or mobile device with an Access ID and PIN. BPS SubCentral can 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS06 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
be accessed at https://bostonps.eschoolsolutions.com, or by 
telephone at 857- 254-1707. 
With BPS SubCentral, schools can create and manage their own 
preferred substitute list, create absences and vacancies, and pull 
individual reports unique to their school. Preferred substitutes 
will be contacted first about a substitute teaching opportunity. If 
the vacancy still exists after all a school’s preferred substitutes 
have been contacted, the SubCentral platform will then begin 
contacting other substitutes registered within the system. Those 
substitutes on a particular school’s ‘Do Not Use’ list will not be 
called, nor will they be able to view open substitute opportunities 
for that school.  
For more information on BPS SubCentral, please contact 
SubCentral via email at bpsSubCentral@bostonpublicschools.org.  
TYPES OF SUBSTITUTE TEACHERS  
● Degree per diem substitute teachers work day-to-day 
assignments to temporarily fill positions. Those with at least 
a bachelor's degree who are assigned to fill a position 
anticipated to be vacant for more than 20 consecutive 
workdays, but less than a full year, or who serve 
continuously for more than 20 consecutive workdays in the 
same assignment, are considered per diem substitute 
teachers covering a long-term assignment.  
o A qualified and properly licensed long-term substitute will 
be granted a provisional teacher contract on or before 
December 1st if the assignment in which they is serving 
becomes vacant for the remainder of the school year.  


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS06 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
● Non-degree per diem substitute teachers do not hold a 
bachelor's degree. The non-degree per diem substitute 
teachers work day-to-day assignments to fill positions on an 
interim basis and may not take on long-term assignments. 
● Cluster substitute teachers are assigned to a school for a full 
year to cover various teacher absences in the school, as 
needed, on a daily basis. The cluster substitute positions are 
typically created during the budget season and charged to 
the school’s budget. If schools are interested in having a 
cluster substitute for the school year, please contact your 
budget analyst and Human Resources staffing manager.  
 
MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS  
Per Diem Substitutes: 
Are required to complete the Sub Skills Basic Training Course 
online at www.STEDI.org; you must complete the course with at 
least an 85% average and submit a Sub Diploma from the course. 
Long-term Substitutes:  
Must have a bachelor’s degree and at least one of the following 
requirements:  
● A Mass. Teaching License (out of state licenses will be 
considered with teaching experience) 
● Complete the Sub Skills Basic Training Course online at 
www.STEDI.org; you must complete the course with at least 
an 85% average. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS06 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
● Two years’ teaching experience. You may additionally be 
asked to complete the Sub Skills Basic Training Course 
online at www.STEDI.org.  
● If you were successfully hired for a substitute teaching 
position and you do not hold an initial teaching license from 
the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and 
Secondary Education, you must take and pass the Utah 
Substitute Assessment test with a score of 85 or above. 
● All candidates must be fingerprinted and pass a criminal 
offender (CORI) and sexual offender (SORI) records check.  
The criminal offender/sexual offender record check 
requirement cannot be waived.  
The Substitute Teaching Institute (STEDI) of Utah State University 
created and oversees the Substitute Teacher Training Program. It 
provides 6–13 hours of sub instructor training, either online or via 
CDs, and an assessment at the completion of the program. The 
cost of the program, which will be borne by the candidate, is 
$39.95 plus shipping and includes the interactive SubInstructor 
training (included as a CD), a substitute teacher handbook, and 
the online sub assessment and SubDiploma. Information for the 
candidates is posted on the BPS website.  
SUBSTITUTE HIRING  
All hiring for substitutes will take place through the online BPS 
Career Center (TalentEd). Applicants must create a profile and 
apply to the district-wide substitute teacher job posting through 
the BPS Career Center (TalentEd). Applicants will be hired as a 
BPS per diem substitute teacher after review of their application 
in its entirety, submission of all required documentation, and 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS06 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
successful completion and passing of a background check, which 
includes fingerprinting and CORI/SORI checks.  
SUBSTITUTE TEACHER REQUEST & RECOMMENDATIONS  
Principals and heads of schools can either request or recommend 
an individual for a per diem or long-term substitute appointment 
at their specific school. To submit a per diem and long-term 
substitute, the school leader or hiring manager will need to 
submit the candidate for hire via the BPS Career Center 
(TalentEd). All school leaders and hiring managers will have 
access to the districtwide substitute job posting.  Please note: 
once the substitute has been hired, it is the responsibility of the 
school to post the absence and vacancy in SubCentral and assign 
it to the substitute as required.  
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT  
Long-term and cluster substitute teachers are required to 
participate in up to 18 hours of professional development with 
regular teachers. If this professional development is scheduled 
beyond the school day, long-term and cluster substitute teachers 
are paid for this time and are compensated through stipend 
payments provided by the school. 
New substitute teachers may also be required to attend up to 
three days of training to prepare them to teach in the Boston 
Public Schools.  
 
ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY  
Heads of schools and principals are responsible for establishing 
practices and procedures that enable substitute teachers to 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS06 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
provide students with educationally meaningful work and allow 
for the maximum educational use of the school day. As part of 
this responsibility, heads of schools and principals or their 
designees should consider providing substitute teachers with the 
following items:  
● A daily plan book, lesson plan, or other academic activity for 
all classes of the absent teacher. Heads of schools and 
principals are responsible for ensuring that all teachers 
prepare appropriately, and continually update plan books 
and lesson plans so that the lesson taught by the substitute 
teacher is consistent with the subject matter being taught 
to the class.  
● A copy of the absent teacher’s schedule, including subjects 
and levels of instruction, room assignments, administrative 
assignments, lunch, and common planning time.  
● Homeroom and class lists and seating plans.  
● A bell schedule.  
● A concise statement of school policies and procedures 
regarding the taking of attendance, modes of disciplinary 
referral, referral for illness, emergency procedures, and any 
other pertinent information a substitute teacher may need.  
● Name and location of the administrator responsible for the 
school's substitute teachers.  
 
These materials may be kept in the school office or distributed to 
substitute teachers in some other manner that is effective.  
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS06 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
BPS SubCentral 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources – Sub Central 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Additional 
Questions: 
For additional questions, please submit an HR 
Inquiry Ticket via the Beacon. This can be 
found on Access Boston (access.boston.gov). 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


