Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER:  
HRS-PP19 
Version 01 
 
 
 
PERFORMANCE-RELATED DISMISSAL PROCESS  
FOR TEACHERS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
In the event the performance evaluation of a teacher results in a 
recommendation for dismissal by a Principal or Head of School, 
the following procedures will be followed: (1) the Superintendent 
shall review all processed recommendations for dismissal and (2) 
if the Superintendent approves the recommendation to dismiss 
the teacher, the Principal or Head of School may institute 
dismissal proceedings set forth in M.G.L. c. 71, section 42. 
Note: A teacher may be removed from the classroom, dismissed, 
or suspended for just cause prior to the completion of the 
evaluation-related process specified in this Circular. 
TERMINATION REQUIREMENTS 
The minimum requirements to proceed with a teacher 
termination can be met in one of two ways, both in cases where 
the teacher was placed on an Improvement Plan: 
If the Evaluator determines that the Educator is not making 
substantial progress toward proficiency, the Evaluator shall 
recommend to the superintendent that the Educator be 
dismissed. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP19 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
If the evaluator determines that the Educator’s practice 
remains at the level of unsatisfactory, the Evaluator shall 
recommend to the superintendent that the Educator be 
dismissed. 
 
Copies of the following information will be submitted to the 
Superintendent via the Office of Labor Relations in order to move 
forward with a recommendation for termination: 
1. 
All less-than-proficient performance evaluations you are 
relying on for potential termination. 
2. 
All other performance evaluations within the last two years. 
3. 
All written feedback to the teacher following an observation 
in which you saw a need for improvement. 
4. 
All correspondence regarding pre-evaluation and post-
evaluation meetings. 
5. 
All written notes from pre-evaluation or post-evaluation 
meetings. 
6. 
A log documenting all artifacts (e.g., syllabus, lesson plan, 
evidence of planning, etc.) submitted to you by the teacher. 
7. 
All notes and correspondence from the teacher concerning 
evaluations, classroom observations, and other matters 
relating to their performance. 
8. 
Correspondence from teachers, parents, or other individuals 
regarding a teacher’s performance, complimentary or 
critical. 
9. 
Attendance and tardiness records and correspondence if 
attendance and/or tardiness is an issue or if the teacher’s 
absences have affected contractually required timelines. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP19 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
10. 
A log documenting any allegations of discrimination brought 
by the teacher to the BPS Office of Equity or the 
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (MCAD), 
e.g., race, age, gender, disability. 
11. 
All documentation about any disciplinary action taken 
against the teacher, only if relevant to performance issues. 
12. 
A draft letter from the principal notifying the teacher of BPS’ 
intent to dismiss based on unsatisfactory performance. 
 
Steps of the termination procedure: 
1. 
The principal/head of school recommends to the 
Superintendent that a teacher be terminated. 
2. 
If the Superintendent approves the recommendation, the 
teacher receives a letter from the principal/head of school 
notifying them of BPS’ intent to dismiss. 
3. 
The teacher has 10 school days after receiving the notice 
of intent to dismiss to meet with the principal/head of 
school to review the decision. 
4. 
After the meeting, if the termination decision remains 
unchanged, the principal/head of school sends the 
teacher a letter communicating the termination decision. 
5. 
The teacher with professional teacher status may seek 
review of the termination decision within 30 days by filing 
a petition for arbitration with the Commissioner of 
Education. 
  
  
For more information about this circular, contact: 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP19 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
Owner: 
Director of Labor Relations 
Department: 
Office of Labor Relations 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Boston, MA 
02119 
Phone: 
617-635-1576 
Fax: 
617-635-7959 
E-mail: 
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


