Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-HS04 
Version 01 
 
SCHOOL LEADER SCREENING PROCESS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The process for recruiting, screening and hiring for school leader 
vacancies requires collaboration among many offices, including 
the Superintendent, Regional School Superintendents, the Office 
of Human Resources, the Office of Engagement, the Division of 
Schools, and the schools with vacant leadership positions.  
School leader vacancies may be filled either through this process, 
or through the appointment of an existing employee or an 
external candidate by the Superintendent. The latter would not 
require the position be posted in the manner described in this 
circular. 
 
POSITION POSTING 
A job posting for school leader positions will be available by 
November 1, 2024. The application can be found by searching 
'school leader'. The selection process will yield qualified 
candidates for the entire district and for autonomous schools.  
► Please note: Autonomous schools have the right to create 
and advertise their own job postings in order to recruit 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 2 of 10 
 
candidates who align with the specific vision and values of 
their communities.  See “AUTONOMOUS SCHOOLS”, page 8. 
 
MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS 
Minimum qualifications are as follows:  
● Master’s degree in education or related field. 
● Evidence of submission or successful completion of all MA-
PAL tasks (Massachusetts Performance Assessment for 
Leaders) or 
● Principal/Assistant Principal licensure or equivalent by time 
of appointment. 
PREFERRED QUALIFICATIONS 
Preferred qualifications are as follows: 
● Fluency in one or more non-English languages. 
● 5+ years of experience as a school leader in a large, urban 
school district. 
PRE-SCREENING AND SELECTION PROCESS 
The selection process consists of the following phases:  
● Phase I: Application and Resume Review (Nov 2024 - Feb 
2025). 
● Phase II: Performance Tasks (Nov 2024 - Feb 2025). 
● Phase III: School-Based Interview (Jan - April 2025). 
● Phase IV: Interview with Superintendent or Superintendent 
Designee (March - April 2025). 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
Candidates who successfully advance through the first two 
phases of the process will be eligible to interview with school-
based hiring teams The school-based hiring process is led by the 
Regional School Superintendent or their designee. The Regional 
School Superintendent or designee will convene the School 
Screening Committee and serve as the Chairperson. As 
Chairperson they shall decide which of the approved candidates 
shall interview with the Committee, based on the characteristics 
and needs of that school community. 
SCHOOL SCREENING COMMITTEE GUIDELINES 
The Regional School Superintendent or designee shall chair the 
School Screening Committee for all school leader positions, 
including those for autonomous schools. The Office of 
Engagement will provide support to the Chairperson of the 
School Screening Committee by coordinating the vote to 
determine who will serve on the School Screening Committee as 
well as by leading those committee members through a bias 
training. 
Members: 
The membership of the School Screening Committee shall 
include the following: 
● The Regional School Superintendent and/or 
superintendent’s designee, who serves as Chairperson. 
● Three teacher members of the Boston Teachers Union (BTU) 
representing the racial and ethnic diversity of the school’s 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 4 of 10 
 
student population, selected by BTU members on the 
School Site Council. 
● One member of the Boston Association of School 
Administrators and Supervisors (BASAS), as selected by the 
Chairperson, with special consideration for any BASAS 
members working at the school. 
● Three parents from the school, selected by parent members 
of the School Site Council, and representing the racial and 
ethnic diversity of the school’s student population. At least 
one must be an elected member of the School Site Council 
or School Parent Council. 
○ Among the three parent members selected, one must 
be a parent of a special education student or a student 
in a program for Multilingual Learners if a special 
education program or program for English Learners is 
in place at the school. Parent members of the School 
Site Council shall select this parent. 
● Optional: At the discretion of the School Screening 
Committee Chairperson, one representative from a partner 
organization that works closely with the school, such as a 
community, business or higher education partner. 
● Secondary only: One student from the School Site Council or 
a student from the Student Advisory Council. 
● School mergers only: In the event two schools are scheduled 
to merge and, as a result must complete a screening 
process for a new School Leader, the School Screening 
Committee shall be comprised of the same members as 
listed above, with the following adjustments: 
○ Two BTU members from each school from different 
racial groups, selected by BTU members on the School 
Site Council  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 5 of 10 
 
○ Two parents from each school, selected by parent 
members of the School Site Council, and representing 
the racial and ethnic diversity of the school’s student 
population. At least one must be an elected member of 
the School Site Council or School Parent Council. 
○ The Operational Leader for the region, who shall serve 
as the BASAS representative. 
All Committee members shall adhere to norms of respect, 
collaboration and confidentiality throughout the screening 
process. In the event any committee member fails to conduct 
themselves according to these norms, that member may be 
removed from the process, per the discretion of the Chairperson. 
Process: 
Upon creation of the School Screening Committee, the 
Chairperson shall give written notice to each committee member 
at least five working days prior to the first meeting. Screening 
Committee members shall also receive from the Chairperson a 
copy of each candidate’s application materials and a screening 
packet, which will include guidelines for interviewing and scoring 
candidates and a list of all committee members.  
School mergers only: In the event two schools are scheduled to 
merge, both sitting school leaders shall have the opportunity to 
be interviewed by the School Screening Committee. 
 
Upon convening, the Committee will: 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 6 of 10 
 
● Review the responsibilities and functions of the committee, 
including this Superintendent’s Circular. 
● Review the job description, including the qualifications 
needed for the position. 
● Review the School Leader Rubric & Scoring Guide for 
candidate interviews, which shall be based on candidates’ 
proficiency in the standards for school-level administrators 
as enumerated by DESE: 
○ Instructional Leadership 
○ Management and Operations 
○ Family & Community Engagement 
○ Professional Culture 
● Committees shall use the School Leader Rubric & Scoring 
Guide as the basis for their scoring. 
○ Per the Guide, School Screening Committee members 
shall score candidate responses in private. The 
Chairperson shall then aggregate scores and 
recommend the top three candidates based on these 
scores (See “Reports” below).  
● Establish an interview schedule. 
○ Set dates and times for candidate interviews and 
future meetings.  
Quorum for the meetings shall be a majority of the members and 
must include the Chairperson and at least one parent and one 
teacher. At least one member present must be a person of color. 
If any of these groups is not represented, the remaining 
committee members may, by unanimous vote, decide to proceed 
with meetings. Decisions of the Screening Committee must be 
made with a quorum present and shall be carried by a majority of 
the members present at the meetings. Voting shall be done by 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 7 of 10 
 
secret ballot unless the committee decides otherwise. All 
members of the Screening Committee are equal in status and 
have one vote. 
Representatives from the Office of Human Capital, the Office of 
Equity, the Office of Engagement or the Office of Leadership 
Development may attend meetings. 
TIMELINE 
In order to ensure the placement of strong candidates as early as 
possible, School Screening Committees shall make every attempt 
to move efficiently through the above-listed steps, while still 
maintaining the integrity of the process. Specifically, School 
Screening Committees shall aim to convene, establish an 
interview schedule and determine the three highest-scoring 
candidates within one month from the date a vacancy becomes 
public. Should the Committee not be on pace to accomplish this, 
the Chairperson reserves the right to waive the quorum 
requirements listed above in order to convene meetings and 
conduct interviews. 
INTERIM APPOINTMENTS 
Any schools which have Interim School Leaders shall convene the 
School Screening Committee in January and shall conclude their 
search by March 1, 2025.  
Any schools with vacancies which emerge following May 1, 2025 
may, at the discretion of the Regional School Superintendent, 
forgo the above-listed steps and the Superintendent shall instead 
appoint an Interim School Leader for the following year. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 8 of 10 
 
SCREENING COMMITTEE MEETING NOTES 
The Chairperson shall ensure that Screening Committee meeting 
notes are taken at each meeting and that the following 
information is accurately noted: 
● Name, race, and affiliation of each Screening Committee 
member. 
● Dates and times of meetings. 
● Attendance at each meeting. 
● All votes taken. 
All members may have copies of the meeting notes. After the 
screening process is complete, the members of the Screening 
Committee will return all resumes and meeting notes to the 
Office of Leadership Development. All information disclosed at all 
Screening Committee meetings is assumed confidential, both to 
ensure the integrity of the hiring process and to protect 
applicants whose employers may not be aware they are applying 
for a position.  
The Chairperson is responsible for working with the Department 
of Schools to improve and/or increase the pool of applicants. 
REPORTS 
Per the School Leader Rubric & Scoring Guide, the Chairperson of 
the Screening Committee will ensure that the scores from the 
Committee’s resume screening and interviews are accurately 
tracked and recorded. The Chairperson will tally the candidate 
scores from the Committee and will identify the top three 
recommended candidates based on these scores. The 
Chairperson will then complete a School Leader Nomination 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 9 of 10 
 
Form which lists these three candidates. The form will be 
submitted to the Chief of Schools, the Chief of Staff and the 
Executive Director of Leadership Development for next steps 
with the Superintendent, who will make the final determination.  
● At least one of these three candidates must be a person of 
color. 
● The Chairperson of the Committee may add additional 
candidate(s) to the nomination form, above and beyond the 
three required, per their discretion. 
FINAL INTERVIEWS AND DECISION 
● Upon receipt of the Screening Committee’s 
recommendations, the Superintendent and/or the Regional 
School Superintendent will interview recommended 
candidates.  
● The Regional School Superintendent and/or designee will 
check references and report back information to the 
Superintendent, who will determine the final appointments. 
The Superintendent retains the authority to appoint the 
school leader recommended by the School Screening 
Committee or may choose to appoint another candidate.  
● The Superintendent will notify the Screening Committee of 
the final decision of the selected candidate. 
● The Office of Human Resources will send offer letters to new 
hires. 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 10 of 10 
 
AUTONOMOUS SCHOOLS 
All elements of this circular shall apply to autonomous schools 
(Pilot, Horace Mann Charters, Innovation and In-District Charter 
Schools) in the same manner they apply to non-autonomous 
schools. The School Screening Committee Chairperson shall 
collaborate closely with the governing boards of autonomous 
schools to ensure an efficient and effective process that aligns 
with the vision of the school community. 
Uniquely, the governing boards of autonomous schools have the 
right to create and advertise their own job postings in order to 
recruit candidates who align with the specific vision and values of 
their communities. Such candidates must still be vetted and 
approved through Phase 1 & Phase 2 of the district-wide process 
outlined above (“Pre-Screening and Selection Process,” pg.1). 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Department: 
Division of Schools  
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 
Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Fax: 
617-635-7956 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


