Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
HRS-PP17 
Version 01  
 
EMPLOYEE RESIGNATION, RETIREMENT, AND 
SEPARATION PROCEDURE 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
A resignation is a voluntary action taken by an employee who 
wishes to terminate their employment with the Boston Public 
Schools. 
RESIGNATION/SEPARATION 
An employee shall notify their immediate supervisor regarding 
termination of employment with Boston Public Schools. This 
notice must be in writing, state the employee’s last day of work, 
and be signed by the employee. A sample resignation letter 
(found on page 7) may be used to provide written notice.   
To submit a resignation letter:  
1. Complete the resignation termination form by clicking on 
the link  Termination/Retirement/Resignation Notification 
Form.  Complete the form and upload a signed letter of 
resignation. Please enter a personal email address on the 
resignation/termination form to receive the final email 
notification acknowledging your resignation from the Office 
of Human Resources. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP17 
Page 2 of 7 
 
2. The resignation form will send an email notification to your 
supervisor.  
3. Supervisors will approve/process, and notification will then 
be sent to the Office of Human Resources to process.    
4. An email notification finalizing the process will be emailed 
to your personal email address that you provide on the 
resignation/termination form. 
5. For those unable to access the link, you can have a 
supervisor or secretary complete the form on your behalf. 
The supervisor will submit via the online process for 
entering resignation/retirement/terminations.  Please 
provide your personal email address to receive the final 
email notification acknowledging your resignation from the 
Office of Human Resources.  
RETIREMENTS 
1. An employee who is planning to retire must first file an 
“Intent to Retire” with the City of Boston Retirement Board. 
Please note that pursuant to Retirement Board policy, an 
employee cannot file the Intent to Retire more than four (4) 
months prior to their intended retirement date.    
2. After you submit your signed Intent to Retire form to the 
Boston State Retirement Board, please complete the 
Resignation/Retirement form by clicking on the  link 
Termination/Retirement/Resignation Notification Form.   
3. Upload a signed letter resigning for the purpose of retiring 
along with your signed Intent To Retire form that you 
submitted to the Retirement Board. Please enter a personal 
email address on the retirement/resignation form to receive 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP17 
Page 3 of 7 
 
an email notification acknowledging your 
retirement/resignation when finalized by the Office of 
Human Resources.   
4. Resignation/Retirement form will send an email notification 
to your supervisor who will sign off on the notification of 
your resignation/retirement and submit notification to the 
Office of Human Resources to finalize the retirement 
termination process.    
5. For those unable to access the link, you can have a 
supervisor or secretary complete the form on your behalf.  
The supervisor will submit via the online process for 
entering resignation/retirement/terminations.  Please 
provide your personal email address to receive the final 
email notification acknowledging your 
retirement/resignation.  
For more information on the retirement process, employees 
should contact the Boston Retirement Board for an appointment 
by telephone at 617-635-4311 or via email at 
retirementboard@boston.gov.  The Retirement Board is located 
at 1 City Hall Square, Room 816, Boston, MA 02201-2038. 
CANCELLATION OF RESIGNATION/RETIREMENT 
Resignations and retirements may be canceled before an 
employee’s effective date of termination.  A signed letter must be 
received by the Office of Human Resources and Retirement 
Board if canceling retirement prior to the close of business on the 
original resignation/retirement date.   
Once the resignation effective date has passed, an employee may 
return to the Boston Public Schools only through the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP17 
Page 4 of 7 
 
reemployment process by applying for a position. 
EMPLOYEE SEPARATION CHECKLIST (EMPLOYEE PORTION): 
Terminating employees are advised to complete the following 
prior to exiting Boston Public Schools: 
1. Complete the resignation/retirement termination 
notification form and upload a signed letter of resignation to 
your school/dept or OHC over the summer months by 
clicking on the link Termination/Retirement/Resignation 
Notification Form.  See sample resignation letter on page 4 
of this circular. 
2. Please return any Boston Public Schools property that you 
still have in your possession, e.g., keys, cell phone, laptop, 
etc., on or before your last day of employment. For keys and 
school building materials, please contact your school leader 
to arrange to return those items. 
3. L4L Laptop (Laptops for Learning), please call the OIIT 
Service Desk, 617-635-9200 to schedule an appointment to 
return the laptop, bag, and peripherals. 
4. Enter all Absence Requests on Employee Self Service (ESS). 
5. Cancel any meetings or out of district activities that are 
scheduled prior to the last day of employment and work 
with your supervisor to achieve a smooth transfer of duties.  
6. Update your home address for future correspondence (i.e., 
final paycheck, W2, benefit information, severance etc.); 
remove mailing address if home address is same as mailing 
address.  
7. Remove all personal files from district servers and 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP17 
Page 5 of 7 
 
computers. 
8. Inform your supervisor of the location of job-related files and 
make those files accessible to the supervisor. 
EMPLOYEE SEPARATION CHECKLIST (SUPERVISOR PORTION): 
An employee’s supervisor is responsible for collecting the 
following applicable items and/or addressing the following 
issues: 
1. Have the employee enter the resignation/retirement letter 
on the electronic termination form at this link  
Termination/Retirement/Resignation Notification Form, or 
you or your secretary can complete the form and upload the 
employee’s signed letter of resignation on the employee’s 
behalf. A sample letter is located on page 4 of this circular. 
2. Process all absences on Employee Self Service in a timely 
manner.  
3. Obtain the following items (all that apply): 
a. Keys (office, building, cabinet, desk, vehicles, other). 
b. Badge/ID (office, building, other). 
c. Department issued equipment (computers, laptops 
(except L4L laptops), printers, modems, etc.) See above 
for L4L laptop returns to OIIT. 
d. Cell phone and accessories, pager, radios. 
e. Department issued uniforms. 
f. Department issued property. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP17 
Page 6 of 7 
 
BENEFITS 
An employee may be eligible to continue to purchase certain 
benefits after they leave. Upon loss of coverage for an employee 
and/or their eligible dependent(s), a COBRA notification packet 
will be mailed to the employee and/or their eligible dependent(s). 
The law requires that this packet be sent by mail to the last 
known address of the employee and/or the employee's eligible 
dependent(s). For additional information on COBRA, see COBRA 
Questions and Answers.  
Please contact the City of Boston Health Benefits Office at 617-
635-4570 for further information.  
The Office of Human Resources provides this FAQ Retirements, 
Resigning, Non-Renewal, Lay Off.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Employee Services 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury MA 02119 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
employeeservices@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP17 
Page 7 of 7 
 
SAMPLE EMPLOYEE RESIGNATION LETTER 
Employee Name: 
Employee Address: 
Date: 
 
Dear (Principal/Head of School/Supervisor), 
This letter is to inform you that I will be resigning from my 
position as [name of position] at [name of school or department] 
effective [date]. 
Optional: May include reasons for resigning in the body of the 
form. 
I certify that this resignation is executed by me voluntarily and of 
my own free will. 
 
Employee Name: 
Employee Signature: 
Date: 


