Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
HRS-PP13 
Version 01 
 
EMPLOYEE SICK LEAVE POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The Boston School Committee will not permit any abuse of sick 
leave privileges. Sick leave is a benefit only to be used for 
absences caused by illness, injury, or exposure to contagious 
diseases. Those employees who use sick leave for any other 
purpose do a disservice to our students, to their co-workers, and 
to the taxpayers. A public perception that School Department 
employees abuse sick leave will undermine confidence in and 
support for public education in Boston. 
Accordingly, it is and shall be the policy of the Boston School 
Committee to monitor the sick leave practices of all its 
employees, to detect any sick leave abuse, and to discipline any 
employee found to have abused the sick leave privileges. No 
legitimate sick leave will be denied. No abuse will be tolerated. 
The Superintendent shall develop and promulgate appropriate 
rules and procedures to implement this sick leave policy. Copies 
of this policy shall be prominently posted at all work locations. 
Attached you will find a document entitled Employee Sick Leave 
Policy Guidelines. The document provides specific details 
regarding (1) the responsibility of each manager with regard to 
sick leave, (2) managerial intervention required, and (3) 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 2 of 10 
 
procedures mandated to ensure the effective implementation of 
the Employee Sick Leave Policy. A copy of these guidelines 
should be posted in the school office, and a copy should be made 
available in teachers' rooms for review by staff. 
The School Committee’s Employee Sick Leave Policy and 
Guidelines cover all employees of the Boston Public Schools. In 
accordance with the guidelines, employees absent for six (6) or 
more consecutive working days must apply for a leave of absence 
through the online application and provide a WH-380-E/F form or 
medical certification/documentation on official letterhead from a 
health care provider as determined by their Collective Bargaining 
Agreement, as well as a fitness for duty report to return to work. 
The medical certification should be on the physician's letterhead 
and should include: 
1. A statement that the physician understands the nature of 
the employee's duties and that the employee is incapable of 
performing the duties and responsibilities of their position. 
2. A statement of anticipated duration of the absence or the 
expected date of the return to work (if the duration is 
unknown, the letter should indicate when the employee will 
be seeing a physician again and an updated letter would be 
required after that visit). 
► Failure to provide the proper physician's certificate 
when required may lead to loss of pay. 
Absences interrupted by weekends and/or holidays are 
considered consecutive. 
All managers are directed to discuss the guidelines with all staff 
members at the beginning of the school year to ensure mutual 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 3 of 10 
 
understanding. Please note the guidelines are consistent with 
the BTU and BASAS contracts. 
The Office of Human Resources has information readily available 
on an employee's accumulated benefits such as vacation, sick 
leave, and personal days. It is also able to monitor the attendance 
of the entire School Department workforce. Principals, heads of 
school, and other administrative heads will be provided with 
periodic attendance data for employees under their jurisdiction. 
These reports are expected to assist managers in providing 
appropriate supervision for individuals who exhibit problematic 
attendance patterns. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Leave of Absence Team 
Department: 
Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9255 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
OHRLeaves@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
EMPLOYEE SICK LEAVE POLICY GUIDELINES 
STATEMENT 
The term “manager,” as used in these guidelines, refers to 
positions such as academic superintendent, senior officer, head 
of school, principal, program director, and director. It is expected 
that managers may in some cases delegate authority to carry out 
these procedures to supervisory personnel reporting to them. 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of these guidelines is to improve employee 
attendance and eliminate any abuse of sick leave benefits. Their 
consistent application by managers, and compliance by all 
employees, will make a substantial contribution toward our 
ultimate goal of providing an effective and high-quality 
education for the students in the Boston Public Schools. 
THE MANAGER HAS PRIMARY RESPONSIBILITY FOR 
EFFECTIVELY IMPLEMENTING THESE GUIDELINES: 
1. Managerial Responsibility: Absenteeism is one of the 
primary reasons for a manager's inability to accomplish 
expected results, since it results in less than optimal student 
progress, missed deadlines, low quality of work due to 
inexperienced replacements, scheduling and coverage 
problems, and low morale of employees who must assume 
the absentee's workload. Employee motivation and 
attendance are key factors affecting the productivity of each 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 5 of 10 
 
unit in the school system. A good attendance practice 
within a school or department is indicative of a well-
motivated and supervised workforce. Therefore, managers 
should realize that it is in their own best interest to develop 
and to maintain good attendance practices, since their 
effectiveness is measured by the accomplishments of their 
schools and departments. 
 
2. Managerial Judgment: Managers will be expected to 
implement these procedures, to counsel employees, and to 
take remedial action when a patterned abuse occurs. Each 
supervisor should analyze each situation based on its merits, 
considering such factors as length of service, total sick leave 
accumulation, number of occurrences (frequency), patterns 
of absenteeism, such as before and after weekends, holidays 
and vacations, severity rate (the duration of absence), and 
the employee's medical history that is previously known to 
the manager and/or from information that may be required 
to be on file with the School Department. 
 
Major attendance problems facing managers are: 
a. 
"Pre-retirement illness" — attempts by long-time 
employees to exhaust their sick leave benefits before 
retirement 
b. 
"Pre-layoff illness" — attempts by employees who 
received a notice for layoff to exhaust their sick leave 
benefits before the layoff becomes effective 
 
c. 
"Post contract non-renewal illness" —attempts by 
employees whose contract has not been renewed 
prior to exhausting sick leave. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 6 of 10 
 
3. Managerial Intervention:  It is important that the manager 
intervene as soon as an absence pattern is detectable. The 
manager can discuss the reasons for the pattern or the 
absences and can prevent the pattern of absences from 
becoming worse. 
Each manager must review the attendance records of each 
employee in their organization at least on a quarterly basis 
to monitor attendance practices and to determine if there 
are patterns of sick leave abuse. Each employee whose 
number of days or the number of occurrences exceed five 
consecutive days absent, and there is reasonable cause to 
believe that the absence is not an appropriate use of sick 
leave, must be interviewed by the manager. The purpose of 
this interview is to determine whether there is any 
possibility of sick leave abuse. A written record must be kept 
concerning the nature of the supervisory discussion or 
interview. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 7 of 10 
 
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS 
To ensure the effective implementation of the Employee Sick 
Leave Policy, employees must adhere to the following 
procedures: 
1. Notification 
a. Employees Serving in Schools:  These employees are 
not entitled to sick leave without loss of pay unless 
they have notified their head of school or principal, in 
accordance with the schedule established by the 
appropriate head of school/principal. Each employee 
must indicate the nature of the illness and the period 
of anticipated absence. If, at the expiration of the 
anticipated period, the employee is not recovered, the 
employee must again notify the head of 
school/principal of the reason for the additional period 
of anticipated absence in accordance with established 
practice at their school. Each school must maintain and 
post in appropriate locations a standard policy for 
notice of absence. 
b. Employees Not Serving in Schools:  These employees 
are not entitled to sick leave without loss of pay unless 
they have notified their manager of the absence, its 
cause, and anticipated duration before the expiration 
of the first fifteen (15) minutes after their normal 
reporting time or as soon as practical. If, at the 
expiration of the anticipated duration, the employee is 
not recovered, the employee must again notify the 
manager of the reason for the additional period of 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 8 of 10 
 
anticipated absence the day before the employee is 
expected to return to work. 
c. Illness During Work Hours: When an employee 
becomes ill during regular work hours, the employee 
must notify the manager. The manager will record the 
length of absence. 
d. Failure to Notify: Employees failing to give proper 
notice in the absence of extenuating circumstances 
shall be considered without authorization and are 
subject to progressive disciplinary action. 
e. Reporting time:  All managers must ensure that all 
time reporting is entered into the system consistent 
with established procedures in order that employee’s 
absences are correctly charged and leave balances 
maintained. As usual, Department Time Summary 
Reports must be submitted to the BPS Payroll Office in 
accordance with the payroll schedule. 
2. Physician's Certificate:  If the absence is of six (6) or more 
consecutive working days' duration, a physician's certificate 
will be required upon return to work, or prior to return if 
requested. When the record of repeated absences reflects a 
clear pattern of abuse — such as consistent three (3) days 
present, two (2) days absent — the manager should request 
a physician's certificate, even though it may not be required 
under the relevant collective bargaining contract. In such 
circumstances, the employee should be advised that a 
physician's certificate may be the only adequate refutation 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 9 of 10 
 
to the charge of sick leave abuse. The physician's certificate 
should include the following: 
a. A statement that the physician understands the nature 
of the employee's duties and that the employee is 
incapable of performing the duties and responsibilities 
of their position. 
b. A statement of anticipated duration of the absence or 
the expected date of return to work (if the duration is 
unknown, the letter should indicate when the 
employee will be seeing the physician again, and an 
updated letter would be required after that visit). 
If the physician's certificate does not include these 
statements, the manager must notify the employee to 
obtain the omitted information before authorizing sick 
leave. 
ALL MEDICAL INFORMATION SHALL BE MAINTAINED ON A 
CONFIDENTIAL BASIS. 
If, during the interview, the supervisor learns that an employee 
has a chronic or disabling condition which may qualify that 
person for consideration as a handicapped individual, (1) you 
should contact the Office of Equity at 617-635-9650. 
 
(1) 
1A handicapped individual includes someone who has, has 
had, or is thought of as having a physical or mental condition 
that substantially limits a major life activity, including working. 
The condition may be permanent or temporary. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 10 of 10 
 
A handicapped individual is defined as any person who has a 
physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or 
more major life activities, such as: caring for oneself, performing 
manual tasks, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, or learning. 
The Office of Human Resources and Office of the Legal Advisor 
are available for advice and counsel. 
While the managers are the central figures in managing 
attendance, the Office of Human Resources and Office of the 
Legal Advisor are prepared to provide them with the following 
technical support: 
1. Advise managers in their effort to change unacceptable 
absence patterns. 
2. Provide an early referral system for health, emotional, 
alcoholic, or drug-related matters. 
3. Provide an effective mechanism for a centralized sick leave 
and vacation reporting system. 
4. Interpret policy and procedures and assist in the resolution 
of operating problems. 
5. Provide advice concerning the implementation of 
progressive disciplinary action. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   


