Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PM06 
Version 01 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF MANAGERIAL EMPLOYEES 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Document Purpose 
Purpose of Performance Management 
Evaluation Process Overview 
The Five-Step Process 
Step 1: Self-Assessment 
Step 2: Analysis, Goal-Setting, and Analysis 
Step 3: Implementation of the Plan 
Step 4: Formative Assessment (Optional) 
Step 5: Summative Evaluation (June 1) 
 
Evaluation Platform and Documentation 
Timeline and Tools 
Appendix A: The Core Competencies 
Appendix B: Rating Levels 
DOCUMENT PURPOSE 
This document describes the performance management and 
evaluation process for managerial employees of Boston Public 
Schools (BPS), both Central Office and school-based. The 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 2 of 10 
 
purpose of this document is to provide clarity to employees and 
supervisors, as well as templates and tools for use during the 
process. This document was created as part of a cross-
departmental working group on central office performance 
management.  
 
PURPOSE OF PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT 
BPS students are the citizens, leaders, scholars, entrepreneurs, 
advocates, and innovators of tomorrow. As a district, we must 
ensure that 100 percent of our students are prepared for college, 
career, and life in the 21st century. We must model the district on 
the classroom we want to see. We have established a system of 
performance management to affirm the ideal that everyone, 
from students to the superintendent, must have sufficient 
resources, information, and support to achieve efficacy in their 
endeavors. 
The fundamental purpose of performance management in the 
BPS Central Office is to maximize the productivity and impact of 
our employees by enabling them to perform at their fullest 
potential. Our approach is designed to provide high-quality 
support to schools, students, and families in BPS to ensure our 
graduates are college, career, and life ready. To do so, our 
performance management system will: 
1. Establish a consistent set of competencies to clearly set and 
communicate expectations for employee performance 
2. Align employee efforts with department and organizational 
goals 
3. Create systems and structures that gather and monitor 
performance in order to support employee feedback, 
growth, and development 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 3 of 10 
 
4. Identify areas of strength to leverage for increased impact, 
and areas of growth for providing targeted support 
5. Provide accountability for individuals and enable them to 
see their contribution to and progress toward organizational 
goals 
6. Connect employee performance to incentives, recognition, 
professional growth, and retention efforts. 
EVALUATION PROCESS OVERVIEW 
The criteria for effective practice for Central Office managerial 
employees are identified in the Core Competencies, which 
defines six categories: 
1. Results Orientation 
2. Collaboration and Communication 
3. Job Knowledge and Skills 
4. Cultural Competency & Equitable Practices 
5. Responsiveness and Service Focus 
6. Leadership [for staff members supervising people or 
projects] 
See Appendix A for greater detail on the set of core 
competencies. 
Evaluations will result in ratings on an employee’s goals, on the 
six Core Competencies, and on overall performance, which will be 
based on the supervisor’s judgment of performance against the 
standards and progress toward goals. Progress toward goals will 
be rated as Goal Achieved, Goal Significantly Met, Active Goal, 
Goal Not Met, and Goal Deferred. Greater details on these rating 
levels can be found in Appendix B. 
The five levels of performance, which apply to performance on 
each competency and the Overall performance rating shall be:  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 4 of 10 
 
“Highly Effective”, “Effective”, “Developing,” “Minimally Effective,” 
and “Ineffective.” Greater details on these rating levels can be 
found in Appendix B. 
THE FIVE-STEP PROCESS 
Based on best practices in performance evaluation, BPS has 
adopted a five-step process for evaluation. This process should be 
followed each year by employees and supervisors. 
Five-Step Process Overview 
 
STEP 1: Self-Assessment (by September 1) 
Employee reviews available evidence of work performance, prior 
feedback and evaluations, and the Core Competencies to 
determine areas of strength and areas for further growth. The 
Self-Assessment is used to inform the employee’s goals and 
action plan for the upcoming year. 
STEP 2: Analysis, Goal-Setting, and Analysis (by October 1) 
Based on the employee’s self-assessment, job description, 
individual aspiration, and school/department goals, the employee 
and supervisor establish 2-4 goals, related to professional 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 5 of 10 
 
practice or performance: 
● A professional practice goal relates to an identified skill or 
set of knowledge that an employee wants to develop or 
improve. When developing a professional practice goal, 
employees and supervisors should both look at past 
performance and feedback, as well as the employee’s 
professional/career aspirations. Professional practice goals 
should align to one or more of the Core Competencies 
● A performance goal is a measurable target or outcome 
related to an employee’s work. Goals should align with an 
employee’s team and/or departmental goal(s). 
STEP 3: Implementation of the Plan (Ongoing) 
The employee performs job duties and responsibilities, 
implements the action steps toward goals, submits evidence 
supporting proficiency, and meets with their supervisor to 
receive and discuss feedback. The supervisor collects and reviews 
evidence, provides ongoing, timely, clear, and actionable 
feedback, and meets with the employee to give and discuss 
feedback, including recommendations for improvement, if 
applicable. 
STEP 4: Formative Assessment (Optional or By February 1) 
Each employee should receive a Formative Assessment to 
provide the employee with written feedback on their 
performance against the Core Competencies and their progress 
toward goals. Typically, the formative will occur midway through 
the assessment year, though it may take place at other times for 
individuals in need of additional support. 
Professional Development Plans are implemented when an 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 6 of 10 
 
employee’s performance is rated Minimally Effective under one 
or more competencies, or overall. They are meant to include 
increased supervision and support for improvement in specific 
areas identified by the supervisor. 
Performance Improvement Plans (PIPs) are implemented when 
an employee’s performance is rated Ineffective under one or 
more competencies, or overall. They are more highly directed 
plans that are typically followed by another evaluation and may 
result in employment action if performance is not sufficiently 
improved. 
STEP 5: Summative Evaluation (June 1) 
Each employee shall receive a Summative Evaluation to provide 
the employee with written feedback and ratings of their 
performance and progress toward goals. 
 
EVALUATION PLATFORM AND DOCUMENTATION 
Managerial employee performance evaluations and related 
documentation are generated and stored in the BPS online 
performance management platform, VectorEvals. Employees 
and supervisors will receive training in accessing, navigating, and 
using the platform prior to the start of their evaluation cycle. 
Training modules will be available in an online, on-demand 
format to employees and supervisors for reference, as well. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 7 of 10 
 
TIMELINE 
Date 
Activity 
July - August 
● Office, team, and individual goal-setting begins 
● Supervisors review of standards and expectations with employees 
September 1 
● Employee Self-Assessments due 
● Employee Goals & Action Plans draft due 
October 1 
● Finalized Employee Goals & Action Plans due 
Ongoing 
● Employee check-ins, at the discretion of supervisor 
● Provide feedback (verbal and written) to employees on progress toward 
goals, observed performance, and work products/artifacts. 
● Implementation also includes peer feedback. 
January  
● Formative Assessment meetings with employees (Optional) 
February 1 
● Formative Assessments finalized and submitted (Optional) 
May 21 - 25 
● Last day to submit artifacts for review prior to Summative Evaluation 
June 1 
● Summative Evaluations finalized and submitted 
 
APPENDIX A: CORE COMPETENCIES (LINK TO SEPARATE 
DOCUMENT) 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 8 of 10 
 
APPENDIX B: OVERALL EFFECTIVENESS LEVELS (BELOW) 
Effectiveness 
Level 
Description 
Highly Effective 
Performance far exceeded expectations due to exceptionally high 
quality of work performed in all essential areas of responsibility, 
resulting in an overall quality of work that was superior; and either 
included the completion of a major goal or project, or 
made an exceptional or unique contribution in support of team, 
department, or district objectives. 
This level is achievable by any employee though given infrequently 
(<10% of employees) 
Effective 
Performance met expectations in all essential areas of responsibility, 
and the quality of work overall was excellent. Annual goals were met. 
Developing 
Performance consistently met expectations in all essential areas of 
responsibility, at times possibly exceeding expectations, and the quality 
of work overall was very good. The most critical annual goals were 
met. 
This level is expected for individuals who are new to the organization 
or to a role. 
Minimally Effective Performance did not consistently meet expectations – performance 
failed to meet expectations in one or more essential areas of 
responsibility, and/or one or more of the most critical goals were not 
met.  A professional development plan (not necessarily a PIP) to 
improve performance must be implemented, including timelines, and 
monitored to measure progress. 
Ineffective 
Performance was consistently below expectations in most essential 
areas of responsibility, and/or reasonable progress toward critical goals 
was not made. Significant improvement is needed in one or more 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 9 of 10 
 
Effectiveness 
Level 
Description 
important areas. A Performance Improvement Plan (PIP) to correct 
performance, including timelines, must be outlined and monitored to 
measure progress. 
 
Goal Status Scale 
Goal Status 
Description 
Goal Achieved: 
All goal milestones and success measures have been achieved for 
100% of goals. 
Goal Significantly 
Met: 
All goal milestones and success measures have been achieved for at 
least 85% of goal. 
Active Goal: 
The goal is still in progress, though some milestones may have been 
achieved. 
Goal Not Met: 
For this goal, some or all milestones and success measures have not 
been met. 
Goal Deferred: 
For timing or organizational reasons, this goal has been deferred. 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 10 of 10 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Evaluation and Performance Management 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Boston, MA 02119 
 
 
Email: 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org 
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


