Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
ODA-02 
Version 01 
 
 
TEST SECURITY AND ETHICS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The purpose of this circular is to ensure that all BPS staff 
understand and follow the appropriate procedures for test 
administration and security on all state and local tests where 
some or all content is deemed to be secure content that must 
not be given to or accessed by unauthorized persons. This 
includes, but is not limited to, paper or digital information. This 
circular also outlines the reporting requirements in the case of a 
security breach or a test irregularity. 
REQUIREMENTS 
Testing is not at the option of parent/guardian or the school, 
except if a student is not required to be tested based on certain 
conditions that are specified in the specific testing requirements. 
Appropriate testing accommodations must be provided to 
eligible students on test day as documented in the students’ 
current Individualized Education Programs (IEPs), Section 504 
Plans, or English Learner (EL) plans.  
School leaders and test administrators must read and adhere to 
all test procedures in the instructions that are issued by the 
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education (MA DESE) and/or the Boston Public Schools. Visitors 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-02 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
are never permitted in the school’s designated testing area; but 
MA DESE and/or BPS staff may make announced or 
unannounced visits to schools during testing days to ensure 
compliance with testing procedures. 
Schools must enforce a strict electronic devices policy during 
testing to maintain test security. The term electronic device 
includes any personal, non-educational device with an on-off 
switch (with the exception of medical equipment), most 
commonly cell phones, smart phones, iPods, iPads, iWatch, 
tablets, laptops, and pagers.  
Schools must clearly inform students that bringing an electronic 
device into the testing area violates district and state policy, and 
violation of this policy is grounds for confiscation. If brought to 
school during testing, electronic devices must be stored in a 
secure location away from students. Acceptable storage includes 
in a bag, backpack, locker, central location in a classroom, or 
school office. 
Consistent with the district’s Acceptable Use Policy (AUP), school 
leaders have the authority to enforce security measures on 
electronic devices when used to access testing materials and 
remove devices found to be in violation of the AUP. If any of the 
electronic devices are accessed during testing, the student’s test 
is compromised and is to be invalidated due to prohibited 
behavior, even if the student did not use the device. For 
suspected student cheating or electronic device violations, the 
school should conduct the investigation of the incident, report 
the test violation, and follow their school’s disciplinary 
procedures to impose sanctions.  


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-02 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
PENALTIES 
Failure by BPS staff to adhere to the Test Security and Ethics 
Requirements may result not only in sanctions and 
consequences imposed by the state as outlined in the specific 
assessment policy, but also in disciplinary action by the 
superintendent. 
PROCEDURES IF TEST IRREGULARITIES OCCUR OR IF YOU 
SUSPECT A SECURITY VIOLATION 
Each person directly involved in secure test administrations is 
responsible for immediately reporting any violation or suspected 
violation of test security. If questions arise concerning test 
security or if any situation occurs that could compromise any part 
of the test administration process and procedure for any state 
tests, call the MA DESE at 781-338-3625 immediately and/or 
report the incident using any required form. Please also advise 
your immediate supervisor and the Office of Data and 
Accountability. For any suspected BPS district assessment test 
violations or irregularities, contact the Office of Data and 
Accountability at 617-635-9450. 
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-02 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
For additional information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director 
Department: 
Office of Data and Accountability 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9450 
Email: 
all-acad-division@bostonpublicschools.org 
  
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


