Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
ODA-05 
Version 01 
 
 
 
BPS SURVEY ADMINISTRATION GUIDELINES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
OVERVIEW 
A federal statute, the Protection of Pupil Rights Amendment 
(PPRA), 20 U.S.C. §1232h, affords some protections for students 
and their parents before certain student surveys are conducted.  
Many student surveys, however, will not come within the scope of 
this statute.  Please assess each student survey carefully before 
administering it to determine if this policy applies.  A student 
survey that is anonymous or voluntary need not comply with the 
following policy.  Additionally, a student survey that is not 
developed or administered with funds received from the United 
States Department of Education also does not need to comply 
with this policy. 
For those student surveys that are developed or administered 
using federal education funds and in which a student is required 
to participate, the following policy applies.  This policy applies to 
those surveys that ask a student to reveal any of the following 
information:  political affiliation; mental illness or psychological 
problems; sexual behavior and/or attitudes; illegal, self-
incriminating, and demeaning behavior; critical appraisals of 
close family members; relationships to which a privilege is 
recognized, such as clergy, medical doctors, or attorneys; 
religious affiliations or beliefs; and income, other than for 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 2 of 10 
  
 
 
eligibility for participation in a program.  Prior to administering 
such a survey, the student’s parent or guardian must consent, in 
writing, to the student’s participation in the survey.  Also, a copy 
of the survey must be made available to the parent or guardian.  
Any such survey should also be brought to the attention of the 
Office of Legal Advisor. 
PERCEPTION SURVEYS 
Student, teacher, and family surveys are an effective tool to 
support success inside and outside of the classroom. These 
surveys are required district-wide; however, schools and 
programs may choose to administer additional surveys (please 
see further down for guidance about administering additional 
surveys). It is the responsibility of all in the Boston Public Schools 
to use the data that emerge from the surveys to ensure that 
every student receives what they need every day. 
Purpose 
The Boston Public Schools’ climate, culture, and feedback surveys 
support the district strategic goals of eliminating opportunity 
gaps and accelerating learning. The surveys: 
● provide teachers, administrators, students, parents, the 
district, and the community with information 
regarding climate, culture, engagement, and student 
learning. 
● are utilized to assess criteria for inclusion as a Family 
Friendly School. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 3 of 10 
  
 
 
● are included in measures to calculate school scores for 
the School Quality Framework and assignment tiers for 
the Home-based Student Assignment System. 
A robust survey system includes surveys that provide information 
on the classroom, school, and district levels and is responsive to 
needs at each of these levels.  
● At the classroom level, the student feedback survey 
provides teachers with data on student’s perceptions 
of instruction and classroom climate, so that teachers 
may create formative goals to better meet the learning 
needs of their students.   
● At the school level, the surveys provide school leaders 
and leadership teams with data to help them measure 
school success in relation to school and district goals; 
assess engagement and the creation of a safe and 
welcoming environment; and work with teachers to 
develop strategies that attend to priority areas.   
● At the district level, the surveys provide district leaders 
with information that allows them to determine if the 
system, individual schools, and central departments 
are making progress regarding the district’s long term 
strategic goals.  Information is needed to assess the 
effectiveness of specific initiatives being implemented 
to achieve those goals, to implement effective 
practices, and to eliminate practices that are 
unsuccessful.  Quality information allows comparisons 
across programs, schools, and classrooms to be data-
driven and equitable. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 4 of 10 
  
 
 
Administration Expectations 
Perception survey administration is required for students, staff, 
teachers, and families in Boston Public Schools during SY24-25. 
BPS administers the Student, Family, Teacher, and Staff Surveys 
through Panorama. Communications are sent centrally; however, 
school-based outreach makes the difference for many families! 
School leaders and coordinators have access to response rate 
tracking and completion lists via Panorama's platform. In 
addition, survey coordinators and school leaders are offered 
training and resources for administration prior to the survey 
window.  
The following table outlines the surveys required for students, 
staff, teachers, and families in Boston Public Schools during 
SY24-25, including the purpose, grade level, and administration 
windows. Specific dates are included in the annual assessment 
calendar released during summer 2024. 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 5 of 10 
  
 
 
 
BPS Districtwide Surveys 
Survey 
Purpose 
Grade 
Adminis-
tration 
Window 
Student 
Climate 
and 
Feedback 
Surveys 
Assesses perceptions of pedagogical 
effectiveness, rigorous expectations, 
relationships, engagement, 
classroom climate, school culture & 
community, belonging, mindset, 
school safety, and more 
3-12 
Mid-Year: 
December 
Spring: April-
May 
Senior Exit 
Survey 
Collects information regarding 
student postsecondary plans and 
overall experience in high schools. 
Gradua-
ting 
Seniors 
April-June 
Teacher 
Climate 
Survey 
Assesses perceptions of school 
climate, culture, relationships, peer 
victimization, school leadership, 
professional learning, etc 
All 
Mid-Year: 
December 
Spring: April-
May 
Staff 
Climate 
Survey 
Assesses perceptions of school 
climate, culture, relationships, peer 
victimization, and school leadership 
All 
 
Spring: April-
May 
Family 
Climate 
Survey 
Assesses perceptions of school 
climate, culture, school 
communication, school fit, school 
safety, engagement, etc. 
All 
Spring: April-
May 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 6 of 10 
  
 
 
Accessing Results 
Teachers and other school staff can access results in Panorama: 
secure.panoramaed.com. (Select “Sign in with Google” and 
choose your BPS email to log in). Results should be reviewed and 
considered with respect to how they may impact planning and 
adjustments, and the alignment with your School Improvement 
90 Day Action Plan: specifically, the Student Culture and Adult 
Culture goals. Resources to support are available in Panorama 
Academy. 
To ensure the data is a reasonable representation of their student 
population, school-level results are only shown if (1) the response 
rate is greater than 10%; and (2) there are at least 7 responses to 
ensure student confidentiality. Support is available through 
Panorama at support+bps@panoramaed.com. 
ADMINISTERING SURVEYS TO MULTIPLE SCHOOL 
COMMUNITIES OR WITHIN THE CENTRAL OFFICE 
The above guidelines and recommendations are to support the 
administration of surveys to students, families, and school staff. 
The remainder of this circular describes the process that will be 
used to create and administer surveys for central office staff or 
multiple school communities. To reduce the number of surveys 
that staff are required to respond to, the Office of Data and 
Accountability will review all surveys prior to their administration. 
Please refer to the BPS survey calendar for existing surveys and 
their timelines, if available. The process below describes how 
these offices will review survey creation and administration. 
Step 1: Survey Request Process 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 7 of 10 
  
 
 
If your office is interested in administering a survey to staff 
outside of your department, you will need to submit a survey 
request form to the Office of Data and Accountability. The form 
will collect information on:  
● the goals and objectives of the survey 
● decisions the survey is meant to inform 
● tabulations and analytics results that will inform the 
decision 
● confirmation that this information is not already being 
collected in other surveys 
● audience and users (especially if intended to for any 
outside agencies) 
● research approval requirement, if any 
● sensitivity of data being collected and any necessary 
security protections  
● ideal timeline for the survey/form to be administered 
as it relates to instructional priorities 
●  
● ideal method for distribution. 
Depending on the targeted survey population, surveys should be 
scheduled in coordination with any standing district surveys to 
mitigate overlap. Departments or teams must share the reasons 
for collecting information and how this information will be used. 
Whether responding to the collection of information is 
mandatory or voluntary, each team should take into 
consideration the timeline of requested responses in relation to 
other district required training, surveys, and events. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 8 of 10 
  
 
 
Step 2: Consultation 
Once you have submitted your survey request form, the Office 
Data and Accountability will meet with you to review your 
request and determine whether it is appropriate and distinct 
from other survey collection tools already in use by the district. If 
the survey is approved to be administered, the Office of Data and 
Accountability will be able to recommend a level of support for 
creating and administering the survey. Examples of ODA support 
may include, but are not limited to, item and domain 
creation/review, sampling strategy, survey administration timing, 
communication; design, hosting, and analysis of collected data. 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 9 of 10 
  
 
 
Step 3: Data Analysis and Dissemination of Information 
A plan for analysis of the survey data should be provided prior to 
initiating the collection of data. Teams are expected to keep 
detailed documentation of activities and decisions informed by 
the data collected. Departments should plan to identify which 
portions of their evaluation will be shared with participants. High 
visibility data, such as results that will be shared with the public, 
the School Committee, and/or School Committee task 
force/working groups should be shared with the Offices of the 
Superintendent and Data and Accountability to interpret results 
from the analysis and inform the process for future recurring 
surveys.  
BEST PRACTICES FOR SURVEYS AND DATA COLLECTION 
1. Shorter surveys will lead to increased response rates. 
Limiting the number of questions in a survey will increase 
the response rate and improve your overall ability to collect 
feedback. Surveys should be designed to minimize the 
respondent’s time and ideally designed to be completed on 
a mobile device in 3-5 minutes. 
2. Minimize open response answers. 
Open response answers (short or paragraph) will increase 
the amount of time it takes to complete a survey and can 
lead to degraded response quality. Using drop-
down/checkbox options as much as possible will improve 
your survey response rates and allow for easier data analysis. 
3. Do not collect data that we already have. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 10 of 10 
  
 
 
A common practice when designing surveys is to ask for 
data that we already have in a data system, such as names, 
grade levels, school name, etc. However, this increases the 
time to complete the survey and increases risk of data leak if 
the responses are not safeguarded. Collecting a 
respondent’s email address or emp/student ID number 
should be sufficient for identifying the person afterwards 
and additional identifying information that is already 
contained in a BPS data system should be used during 
analysis. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director 
Department: 
Office of Data and Accountability 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9450 
Email: 
all-acad-division@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


