Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
ODA-06 
Version 01 
 
 
 
PARTICIPATION GUIDELINES FOR TESTING ENGLISH 
LEARNERS ON STATEWIDE ASSESSMENTS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent versions. 
The purpose of this circular is to provide schools with the 
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education (MA DESE) guidelines for testing English Learner (EL)1 
students on statewide assessments.   
DEFINITION  
According to MA DESE, an EL student is a student whose native 
language is not English, and currently unable to perform ordinary 
classroom tasks in English. An EL student also scores less than 
proficient on an English language proficiency assessment. When 
a student has been identified as an EL according to MA DESE and 
U.S. Department of Justice requirements, a student retains this 
designation, regardless of their program setting until they meet 
 
1 English Learner (EL) refers to a specific subset of Multilingual 
Learners (MLs) who are classified as English learners. This term is 
used in federal and state laws, regulations, and policies. For more 
information, see MA DESE’s Guidance on English Learner 
Education Services and Programming, page 5, available at 
https://www.doe.mass.edu/ele/guidance/. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 2 of 13 
 
 
 
state exit criteria2. Students who meet the exit criteria must be 
reclassified as Former English Learners (FELs). 
PARTICIPATION REQUIREMENTS FOR EL STUDENTS 
Federal and state laws require that all EL students participate in 
statewide assessments. Massachusetts students will meet the 
requirements of these laws by participating in both the MCAS 
and ACCESS for ELLs tests.  
EL Participation Requirements in Statewide Assessments 
 
 
ACCESS  
Grades K2-12 
MCAS  
ELA 
Math 
Science 
and 
Tech/Eng 
First-Year 
EL 
Students3 
Required only for 
K2-12 grade 
students entering 
Optional4 
Required 
Required 
 
2 Students must score 4.2+ overall and 3.9+ in literacy on ACCESS 
for ELLs to be reclassified as former English learners (FELs). MA 
DESE will release Alternate ACCESS exit criteria in fall 2024. 
3 Results for first year EL students are not included in MCAS 
school and district summary results or in state accountability 
reporting. 
4 Optional, provided that the student has participated in ACCESS 
for ELLs testing. This first year exemption shall be applied one 
time. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 3 of 13 
 
 
 
before ACCESS 
for ELLs testing is 
completed 
All Other 
EL 
Students 
Required 
Required 
Required 
Required 
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 4 of 13 
 
 
 
ACCESS FOR ELLS AND ALTERNATE ACCESS FOR ELLS 
All EL students must be assessed annually to measure their 
English language proficiency and progress in learning English in 
the four domains of reading, writing, listening, and speaking. 
Students in grades K2-12 who are identified as EL must 
participate in ACCESS for ELLs testing or the Alternate ACCESS 
for ELLs for their grade. This requirement applies regardless of 
the number of years a student has been enrolled in U.S. schools 
and whether their parent or guardian has an approved request to 
opt-out of ESL services. The following students must participate:  
● students who were reported as EL in the October 2024 SIMS, 
and 
● students who enroll in school after the October 2024 SIMS 
submission and prior to February 7, 2025 who will be 
reported as EL in the March 2025 SIMS.  
Foreign exchange students who are coded as #11 under DOE013 
“Reason for Enrollment” in SIMS must participate in an ACCESS 
for ELLs test, if they are reported as English learners. They are also 
required to participate in the MCAS tests specified for the grade 
in which they are reported.  
ALTERNATE ACCESS FOR ELLS 
This is the state’s alternate English language proficiency 
assessment for EL students in grades K2-12. This assessment is 
designed specifically for those EL students with the most 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 5 of 13 
 
 
 
significant cognitive disabilities5 who are unable to meaningfully 
participate in ACCESS for ELLs, as indicated in the student’s IEP. 
This paper-based assessment is uniquely designed to monitor 
students’ progress in acquiring academic English.  
MCAS  
EL students must participate in all MCAS tests scheduled for their 
grades, regardless of the language program and services they are 
receiving or the amount of time they have been in the United 
States. The one exception applies to first-year EL students who 
enrolled in U.S. schools after March 1, 2025 and who were not 
reported in the March 2024 SIMS report, for whom only MCAS 
ELA testing in Spring 2025 is optional.  
Note: EL students in high schools need to pass MCAS tests as a 
state requirement for graduation. There are opportunities for 
retesting if students do not pass MCAS the first time. 
 
 
 
5 For more information, see 
https://www.doe.mass.edu/mcas/access/participation-
guidelines.html. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 6 of 13 
 
 
 
ASSESSMENT TESTING WINDOWS  
The testing windows for administering the SY2024-2025 annual 
assessments in Boston Public Schools are listed below: 
 SY 2024-25 Dates State Assessment 
Nov. 6- 7 
November 2024 MCAS HS ELA Retests 
Nov. 12-13 
November 2024 MCAS HS Mathematics Retests 
Jan. 6- Feb. 14 
2025 ACCESS for ELLs 
Feb. 4- 5 
February 2025 MCAS HS Biology and 
Introductory Physics Tests 
Mar. 6 & 7 
March 2025 MCAS HS ELA Retests  
Mar. 11- 12 
March 2025 MCAS HS Mathematics Retests  
Mar. 24 Apr. 18 
Spring 2025 MCAS Grades 3-8 ELA Test  
Mar. 25-26 
Spring 20254 MCAS Grade 10 ELA Test 
Mar. 28 
2025 MCAS Alternate Assessment (MCAS-Alt) 
Submission Deadline 
Apr. 28-May 23 
Spring 2025 MCAS Grades 3-8 Mathematics & 
Grades 5&8 STE Tests  
Apr. 28- June 6 
Spring 2025 MCAS Grade 8 Civics Test 
May 20 21 
Spring 2025 MCAS Grade 10 Mathematics Test 
June 4-5 
Spring 2025 MCAS High School STE Tests 
 
Note: dates are based on the State Initial Release of the 2024–25 
MCAS and ACCESS for ELLs Testing Schedule, as of 5/15/2024. 
These dates are not considered final until confirmed by DESE. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 7 of 13 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING EL STUDENTS IN THEIR FIRST 12 
MONTHS OF ENROLLMENT IN U.S. SCHOOLS 
For recently arrived ELs who have been enrolled in a U.S. school 
for the first time after March 1, 2024, and who were not reported 
in the March 2024 SIMS report, the following apply:  
1. The participation in ACCESS for ELLs or Alternate ACCESS 
for ELLs testing is required, provided that the student 
enrolls in school before February 7, 2025.  
2. The participation in Spring 2025 MCAS ELA assessment6 is 
not required but is recommended for student diagnostic 
purposes only. Testing in MCAS ELA is strongly encouraged 
to be considered an opportunity for students in high school 
grades to earn a passing score for graduation requirements.  
3. For students expected to participate in statewide 
assessments, non-participation in ACCESS and MCAS testing 
negatively impacts the school and district accountability. 
 
 
 
6 ELA testing is also optional for EL students from Puerto Rico 
who are in their first year of enrollment in a Massachusetts 
school.  


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 8 of 13 
 
 
 
SCHOOL AND DISTRICT REPORTING FOR EL STUDENTS  
Reporting 
Measure 
 
First Year ELs 
(1st year in any U.S. school) 
 
All Other ELs 
(Regardless of 
number of years 
enrolled in BPS) 
Students Reported 
in the district’s 
October 2024 SIMS 
or enrolled before 
February 7, 2025 
Students 
Enrolled after 
February 7, 2025  
Assessment 
Participation 
Rate for 
MCAS ELA is 
based on 
ACCESS 
Students are 
expected to take 
the ACCESS test to 
be counted in the 
school MCAS 
participation rate 
for ELA. Regardless, 
student’s 
participation in the 
MCAS ELA test is 
optional. 
 
If a student does 
not participate in 
ACCESS testing, the 
student counts as 
‘non-participant’ for 
MCAS in the 
Students count 
as participants 
regardless of 
participation in 
MCAS ELA 
testing. ACCESS is 
not required if a 
student enrolled 
at the end of the 
testing window.  
 
Students are 
expected to take 
the ACCESS test 
to be counted in 
the school MCAS 
participation rate 
for ELA. 
Otherwise, the 
student counts 
against the 
school MCAS 
participation rate 
for ELA.  
 
MCAS ELA testing 
is not optional.  
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 9 of 13 
 
 
 
Reporting 
Measure 
 
First Year ELs 
(1st year in any U.S. school) 
 
All Other ELs 
(Regardless of 
number of years 
enrolled in BPS) 
Students Reported 
in the district’s 
October 2024 SIMS 
or enrolled before 
February 7, 2025 
Students 
Enrolled after 
February 7, 2025  
school's MCAS ELA 
participation rate.  
Accounta-
bility 
Determina-
tions 
Students’ MCAS results7 are not 
included in the accountability 
calculations. For first year ELs who 
participate in ELA testing, results will be 
provided at the school level and will be 
used for Competency Determination 
purposes for high school students.  
Students’ MCAS 
results are 
included in the 
accountability 
calculations. 
 
 
 
 
7 First-year EL students must participate in MCAS Mathematics 
and Science and Technology/Engineering tests, although results 
will be reported for diagnostic purposes only and students’ 
results will not be included in school and district summary results 
or in state accountability reporting. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 10 of 13 
 
 
 
PROVIDING APPROPRIATE TESTING ACCOMMODATIONS TO ELS 
Testing accommodations involve changes to testing procedures, 
testing materials, or the testing situation to allow students 
meaningfully participate in an assessment. However, testing 
accommodations must not alter the test construct or the test 
content being measured.  
Testing accommodations for ELs are designed to address their 
unique linguistic needs during the normal process of English 
language acquisition. When appropriately assigned, testing 
accommodations offer ELs the opportunity to demonstrate 
knowledge in a subject, regardless of their English language 
proficiency level. This provides schools and divisions with an 
accurate picture of an EL’s content area achievement. 
EL students may be eligible for testing accommodations on 
MCAS assessments. Certain testing accommodations may be 
more appropriate for ELs at a particular language proficiency and 
for certain MCAS assessments. Decisions about accommodations 
for EL students should be made by the Language Acquisition 
team of educators familiar with the student. These decisions 
should be documented as described in the MA DESE MCAS 
Accessibility and Accommodations Manual. 
The following accommodations are available to ELs, with or 
without disabilities, on MCAS tests:  
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 11 of 13 
 
 
 
Accommodation 
Applicability 
Paper-based edition 
(EL1) 
May be administered to a first year EL student 
with a low level of English proficiency or an EL 
student who has little or no familiarity with 
technology (student does not use a computer 
routinely). 
Authorized Bilingual 
Word-to-Word 
Dictionary and 
Glossary (if available) 
(EL2)8 
List of authorized English/Native Language 
dictionaries (also available to Former ELs). 
Bilingual dictionary use for MCAS tests is strictly 
limited to those that provide word-to-word 
translations. Dictionaries that include definitions, 
synonyms, antonyms, phrases, and other 
information are prohibited. Electronic dictionaries 
are not allowed.  
Text-to-speech (TTS) 
(EL3.1) 
 
Next-generation computer-based Mathematics, 
grades 5 and 8 Science and Technology/ 
Engineering (STE) and/or high school Biology or 
Introductory Physics tests 
Human read-aloud 
(EL3.2) 
Next-generation computer-based or paper-based 
Mathematics and/or Science and Technology/ 
 
8 The use of DESE approved word-to-word bilingual dictionaries is 
strongly encouraged if students have demonstrated usage with 
need in accessing the native language definition. Some students 
with limited academic proficiency in their native language may 
find the dictionary usage a deterrent or a barrier to access the 
definition and translation. School teams are advised to use 
professional judgment in assessing the need based on the 
individual learner. 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 12 of 13 
 
 
 
Accommodation 
Applicability 
Engineering tests or legacy Mathematics or ELA 
Composition retests 
Scribe (including 
human scribe or 
speech-to-text) (EL4.1, 
EL4.2) 
Mathematics and/or STE tests or legacy ELA 
Reading Comprehension retest 
English/Spanish test 
version for 
Math/Biology/Physics 
only (EL7)  
Intended only for a Spanish-speaking EL student 
who has been in the U.S. for less than 3-years; 
Available in computer- and paper-based formats. 
 
 
The student should be introduced to an accessibility feature or 
accommodation as early as possible in the school year, prior to 
the assessment. Accessibility features and accommodations are 
intended to remove barriers and allow EL students to 
demonstrate their knowledge and skills more effectively and 
should never be provided for the first time on a statewide 
assessment. 
Please consider the following resources available: 
● MA DESE MCAS and ACCESS Participation Requirements 
● MA DESE Authorized Bilingual Word-to-Word Dictionaries 
and Glossaries for Use by ELs and FELs on MCAS 
● MA DESE MCAS Accessibility and Accommodations Site 
IDENTIFYING FIRST YEAR EL STUDENTS   


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 13 of 13 
 
 
 
A list of the identified first year ELs, students who have been in 
the U.S. for less than 12 months and are actively enrolled in your 
school, can be retrieved through SIS (ASPEN). On the ‘Student’ 
tab in the field set menu, filter for “First Year in U.S. Schools LEP 
Student.” A report will be generated based on the school 
enrollment up to the date of retrieval. 
In January 2025, the Office of Data and Accountability will flag 
these students in the SR/PNP file uploaded on the Spring 2025 
testing platform. Schools may later export this file to identify the 
First Year EL students. New first year EL students enrolled after 
January 2025 will not be coded in the file, but schools can identify 
them in ASPEN.   
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director 
Department: 
Office of Data and Accountability 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9450 
Email: 
all-acad-division@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


