Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
ODA-03 
Version 01 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES FOR ACCESSING 
STUDENT DATA 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
OVERVIEW 
Boston Public Schools recognizes and values the planning, 
research, and evaluation work done by our partner organizations, 
policymakers, and the greater education community to improve 
education. The Office of Data and Accountability has established 
the following guidelines regarding the processing of data 
requests to improve the quality, timeliness, security, and 
appropriateness of requests and request handling. Additionally, 
as the Office of Data and Accountability is charged with 
protecting student privacy and confidentiality, all student data 
requests will be evaluated against federal, state, and local data 
regulations to ensure student confidentiality.  
The following data sources are considered directory information. 
By federal, state, and local laws, they can be given to external 
parties without explicit consent from parents/guardians. All other 
student data are not considered directory and should not be 
shared with members of the public without express consent from 
parents/guardians or unless disclosure is expressly permitted by 
an exemption under federal or state law. Schools should not 
share any non-directory student data with external parties, 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 2 of 11 
 
 
members of the public, or media outlets. Common examples of 
non-directory information that should not be shared include, but 
are not limited to, date of birth, BPSID, and school name. All 
requests for non-directory student information should be 
directed to the Office of Data and Accountability.  
Directory Information: 
1. Student’s name  
2. Age  
3. Grade Level 
4. Dates of enrollment  
 
GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURE FOR ACCESSING STUDENT DATA 
Publicly Available Data 
The Boston Public Schools (BPS) and the Massachusetts 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (MA DESE) 
make a number of datasets and reports publicly available online. 
Before submitting a data request, please review Appendix I to see 
if your data request is included in publicly available data. 
Additionally, BPS departments regularly make presentations to 
the Boston School Committee. See Appendix I for links to 
materials from School Committee meetings.. Appendix I includes 
the following types of data available for public use.
● General data profile of 
BPS 
● Student Attendance 
and Discipline 
● Standardized test 
results 
● School Climate 
● Student Enrollment 
and Demographics 
● High School and 
Postsecondary


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 3 of 11 
 
 
 
For school personnel, there are additional reports available in 
Aspen and Panorama.  
Legal Guidelines on Requesting Student Data 
If your data needs are not met by publicly available reports 
provided by BPS and MA DESE (see Appendix I), you may be able 
to request certain additional data. The Family Educational Rights 
and Privacy Act (FERPA), the Massachusetts Department of 
Elementary and Secondary Education (MA DESE), and the Boston 
Public Schools establish regulations that maintain family and 
student data privacy rights. These regulations restrict BPS and 
schools governed by BPS from providing personally identifiable 
information without family or student consent1. Additionally, any 
individual or organization intending to use BPS student data for 
research and/or evaluation purposes must submit a research 
proposal to the district before any research activities, including 
administrative data sharing, may take place. Receipt of grant 
funds does not guarantee approval to conduct research by the 
BPS Office of Data and Accountability. Guidelines for conducting 
research in BPS and the research application can be found on the 
BPS website.  
For data requests that include either identifiable or de-identified 
 
1  Exceptions may apply to the general data request 
requirements. Three common exceptions include: 
1. District sponsored-studies to improve instruction (Studies); 
2. Evaluations or audits of federally-mandated programs 
(Audit); or 
3. Provisions of data to appropriate school and central office 
staff (School Official) 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 4 of 11 
 
 
student-level data, a written and signed agreement will be 
required, depending on the scope of the request. The Office of 
Data Accountability will communicate with all requesters to 
execute the appropriate agreements prior to sharing data. 
For requests for individual student records, please see the BPS 
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-7: Privacy of Student Information 
and Student Record Procedures: How to Respond to Student 
Record Requests in Compliance with FERPA and State Law.  
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 5 of 11 
 
 
In order to determine the next steps for your data needs: 
WHAT CATEGORY OF DATA IS REQUESTED? 
 
Level of Data 
Data Request Requirements 
Aggregate Data 
De-identified aggregate level data is generally 
available to requesters without explicit 
parent/guardian consent. Aggregate groups that 
contain fewer than 10 students will be suppressed to 
protect privacy. To gain access to this data please see 
the section below on the process to request data. 
Student-Level 
Administrative 
Data 
De-identified student-level administrative data 
requires a current signed non-disclosure agreement 
(NDA) with the Office of Data and Accountability. 
Student-Level 
Roster Data 
Identifiable student-level roster data requires current 
family consent as well as a current signed NDA with 
the Office of Data and Accountability. 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 6 of 11 
 
 
WHO IS REQUESTING DATA? 
Requester  
Notes  
BPS Officials 
and School 
Personnel 
School leaders have access to identifiable and individual 
student data only for the students in their school for the 
academic year that they are enrolled in the school. 
Teachers have access to identifiable and individual 
student data only for the students they are teaching in 
that academic year. 
Researcher 
All research requests must go through the research 
proposal process.  
BPS School- 
Community 
Partners 
BPS deeply values and recognizes school-community 
partnerships as a key strategy in our collective efforts to 
ensure all our students achieve success in college, career, 
and life. Data can be an important tool for partners to 
effectively collaborate with schools to strengthen 
services for students. For partners to collect or access 
any data about students, school-community partners 
must be fully registered on PartnerBPS. A complete 
registration on PartnerBPS includes registration of all 
programs the Partner runs in BPS and all partnerships 
they have with BPS schools. More information on the 
PartnerBPS registration process can be found here. 
Partners must also have active parental consent to 
obtain individual and identifiable data on students 
unless the request falls under the FERPA exceptions. 
Furthermore, partners must sign a Non-Disclosure 
Agreement with the district before receiving any data. If 
a school-community partner has any agreement with 
schools including memoranda of understanding, 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 7 of 11 
 
 
contracts for services, and/or school-based partnership 
agreements, this must also be provided when 
submitting a data request. Typical school-community 
partner data requests include student demographics, 
quarterly attendance, and course grades for consented 
enrolled students.  
Media 
All media requests must go through the BPS 
Communications Office. 
Agencies 
outside of BPS 
Agencies may receive aggregate level de-identified data. 
Any aggregate group of fewer than 10 students may be 
suppressed to protect student privacy.  
 
PROCESS FOR REQUESTING DATA 
To receive data according to the guidelines listed above, requests 
must be submitted through the Office of Data and 
Accountability’s Data Request Form.  
In preparation for completing the form, please have the following 
information available: 
● Purpose/Use: how will the requested data be used? 
● Intended Audience: with whom will you share the 
data/analysis? Note: depending on the nature of the data 
request, some data may not be appropriate for sharing 
with the public. 
● Summary of data request: please describe in detail what 
data is being requested, including school years, student 
population, student attributes, and data scope.  
 
Please note that if you are requesting data for a specific group of 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 8 of 11 
 
 
students, BPS student ID numbers or state-assigned student ID 
numbers must be provided. Requests without ID numbers will 
not be fulfilled. 
After submitting the form, requesters will receive an automatic 
confirmation email. If analysts have any clarifying questions, they 
will reach out to the requester within 3-5 business days. While 
ODA endeavors to fulfill all non-research requests within 15 
business days, high volume and more complex requests may 
dictate a longer turnaround time. As such, we will attempt to 
fulfill partner data requests with an already executed NDA within 
15 business days; and, we will attempt to fulfill research requests 
with a fully executed NDA within 25 business days. Please plan 
accordingly when submitting a data request. The Office of Data 
and Accountability reserves the right to deny certain data 
requests.  
► All requests from the media must go through the BPS 
Communications Office. Communications can be 
reached at 617-635-9265 or 
communications@bostonpublicschools.org. 
► All public records requests should be submitted through 
the City of Boston’s online Public Records Center. 
FEES FOR DATA REQUESTS 
Some data requests may incur a fee, dependent on size, the time 
required, and the scope of the request. Upon receipt of a data 
request, the Office of Data and Accountability will communicate 
with the requester and provide a fee estimate, if applicable. 
 
For additional information about this circular, contact: 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 9 of 11 
 
 
Owner 
Senior Executive Director 
Department: 
Office of Data and Accountability 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9450 
Email: 
rc069@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 10 of 11 
 
 
APPENDIX I: PUBLICLY AVAILABLE DATA  
Overview of Boston Public Schools 
● BPS At a Glance 
● Facts and Figures 
● Boston District Profile (MA DESE) 
● BPS School Profiles (MA DESE) 
● Data and Reports produced by the Office of Data and 
Accountability 
● School Committee Meetings Materials 
Standardized test results 
● MCAS results by school and district, with options to 
disaggregate by subgroup and grade level 
● PARCC results by school and district, with options to 
disaggregate by subgroup 
● NAEP results 
● ACCESS results 
Student Enrollment and Indicators 
● Attrition 
● Enrollment by Grade - Number of students by grade 
● Enrollment by Kindergarten - Enrollment by Kindergarten 
● Enrollment by Race/Gender - Percent of public school 
students by race and gender. 
● Enrollment by Selected Population - Number and percent 
of public school students in subgroups: First Language 
Not English (FLNE), English Language Learners (ELL), 
Students with Disabilities, High Needs, and Low Income. 
● Enrollment for Students with Disabilities and CVTE 
● Mobility Rate Report - Students transferring into or out of 
public schools, districts, or the state. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 11 of 11 
 
 
● Student Attendance Report 
● Student Retention Report 
● Student Discipline - Student Discipline data is reported 
from the Student Safety and Discipline Report (SSDR) 
● Student Discipline Days Missed Report - Student 
Discipline Days Missed Report 
School Climate 
● Reports can be found on the BPS website.  
High School and Postsecondary Data 
● Advanced Placement Participation - Number of students 
who took one or more Advanced Placement exams for 
each subject. 
● Advanced Placement Performance - Number of students 
who received each possible score on the Advanced 
Placement exam for each subject. 
● Dropout Report - This report provides the percentage of 
Massachusetts public high school graduates who drop 
out of high school. 
● Graduates Attending Higher Ed. - Graduates Attending 
Higher Ed. 
● Graduation Rates - Percent of students who graduate 
with a regular high school diploma within 4 or 5 years by 
student group. 
● MassCore - The Massachusetts High School Program of 
Studies (MassCore) is intended to help our state's high 
school graduates arrive at college or the workplace well 
prepared and reduce the number of students taking 
remedial courses in college.  
● Plans of High School Grads  
● SAT Performance 


