Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SAF-03 
Version 01 
 
LOCKER POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
Consistent with the policy outlined in Superintendent’s Circular 
SAF-02, Weapons and Objects of No Reasonable Use, this 
memorandum explains the Boston Public Schools’ policy 
regarding student locker searches. 
All students and parents must understand that lockers are the 
property of the Boston School Department, made available for 
students’ use and convenience. Lockers remain the property of 
the Boston School Department while being used by students. 
School administrators, other school department personnel, 
including but not limited to teachers, custodians, and school 
police have authority to search student lockers; any personal 
effects found within lockers; and places of concealment within 
those personal effects. Students will be held accountable for the 
contents of their lockers and the contents of their personal 
effects. Any contraband or evidence of a crime found because of 
a locker search will be turned over to the appropriate authorities.  
The information from the above paragraph is to be included in all 
school-based rules and all student handbooks. Students and 
parents must be informed that such information serves as prior 
and ample notice of the School Department’s student locker 
policy. The phrase “prior and ample notice” is to be included in 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-03 
Page 2 of 4 
 
school-based rules and student handbooks. 
In implementing the locker policy, each school must adhere to 
the following guidelines: 
1. Each school will determine its own procedure for assigning 
lockers and issuing padlocks and locker keys. This procedure 
must be included in the school-based rules and student 
handbook. Students must adhere to all school-based rules 
pertaining to locker use. 
2. Only school issued padlocks and locker keys are to be used. 
All unauthorized padlocks are to be removed immediately 
upon detection, and the locker and its contents immediately 
searched by the school leader, principal, or designee. 
3. Locker assignments are to be documented. This document 
is to contain the student’s name and the appropriate master 
key information or the padlock combination. This document 
is to be kept in a secure but readily available place in the 
main office of the school.  
4. Students are not to share lockers, unless authorized by the 
school leader, principal, or other building administrator. 
5. All unused lockers are to be cleaned out and locked or 
sealed to prevent unauthorized use. 
6. School leaders and principals will arrange for periodic 
inspection of lockers by school personnel, including at least 
one general cleanup during the school year. Personal effects 
removed from lockers are to be inventoried and reasonable 
efforts made to return property to its owners. Contraband 
and evidence of a crime is to be inventoried and turned over 
to the appropriate public safety agency. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-03 
Page 3 of 4 
 
7. School leaders, principals, and other school department 
personnel will conduct inspections of student lockers when 
it has been reasonably determined that a safety or security 
problem exists, or that there is reasonable suspicion that the 
student has evidence in the locker tending to show either a 
violation of the law or a violation of school rules. Personal 
effects are to be inventoried and reasonable efforts made to 
return property to its owner. Contraband and evidence of a 
crime is to be inventoried and turned over to the 
appropriate public safety agency. 
8. Students whose lockers contain contraband or evidence of a 
crime will be subject to the provisions of the Code of 
Conduct and to the applicable criminal statutes. If 
contraband or evidence of a crime is confiscated from a 
student's locker, procedures detailed in Superintendent 
Circular SAF-02, Weapons and Objects of No Reasonable 
Use, cited above are to be followed. 
 
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-03 
Page 4 of 4 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Deputy Chief of Safety 
Department: 
Safety Services 
Mailing Address: 
213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000 
Fax: 
617-635-8006 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


