Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SAF-12 
Version 01 
 
SCHOOL ACCESS CONTROL 
 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
AMENDMENT FOR SY 2024-2025:  
The safety, health, and wellness of our students, staff, and 
families is our highest priority at Boston Public Schools. 
Parents/guardians are asked to drop off and pick up their 
students on the exterior of the school building at the area(s) 
designated by your school leader/staff. 
● Parents/guardians should contact their school directly, via 
phone or email, to schedule any discussion or virtual 
appointments that they would like to have on behalf of their 
student. 
● If a student is sick or injured and needs to be picked up, 
school staff will contact the parent/guardian to make 
arrangements and escort the student to meet the 
authorized adult. School staff will verify identification of the 
individual prior to releasing the student via exterior camera 
and intercom.  
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-12 
Page 2 of 7 
 
SAFETY PROTOCOLS PERTAINING TO INDIVIDUALS IN AND 
OUTSIDE THE FACILITY 
If school staff have safety concerns pertaining to an individual 
outside or inside the facility, they should immediately contact the 
Department of Safety Services/Boston at 617-635-8000. In the 
case of any imminent threat to student or staff safety, the Boston 
Police Department should be notified immediately by dialing 911. 
The Boston Public Schools Safety Services Department should 
also be notified by dialing 617-635-8000. 
Each school in the district must, through its School Safety 
Contingency Plan, have clear and comprehensive school access 
control protocols in place. School access control plans must 
adhere to the following: 
● Ensure that only those students, staff and others who are 
authorized to be in the school building are admitted to the 
facility. 
● Require all staff (school based, central office, 
contractors/vendors, etc.) to wear and prominently display 
their BPS identification cards at all times while on school 
property and during school-based activities (e.g., field trips, 
school assemblies, outdoor activities). All staff are also 
required to follow all school access protocols and 
procedures as outlined in this circular.  
● Employ a standard operating procedure that all doors to the 
school building are locked and secured at all times, while 
simultaneously allowing for appropriate egress from inside 
the building.   
● School secretaries and other staff should NOT admit any 
visitor to the building until they can reasonably ascertain the 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-12 
Page 3 of 7 
 
identity of the individual seeking entrance and the reason for 
entry. Staff must use an intercom, camera buzzers and 
monitors to assist them with observing and communicating 
with any individual seeking access to the facility. 
● Secretaries and other staff should NOT allow (buzz in) people 
in without knowing or asking the visitor the reason for being 
at the school. The camera buzzer shall be used to identify the 
person and the reason for their visit before allowing them to 
enter school premises “Hello, how can you help you, do you 
have an appointment?,... please indicate the reason for your 
visit and the person who is hosting you during your visit…” 
● Post appropriate signs directing visitors to the main office. 
● Any staff member that finds a person in a school building 
without an appropriate visitor pass or BPS ID is encouraged 
to inquire of the person’s business or reason for being there. 
The person should be directed to the main office for further 
assistance. If the person may be creating an unsafe 
environment, please follow the procedure as outlined above 
under “Important Note.” 
● ALL staff should inform the designee at the main office in 
the event they are expecting a visitor and provide name and 
reason prior to the visitor’s arrival. In the event a family 
member, partner, or friend is dropping something off for a 
staff member, the main office designee MUST obtain verbal 
confirmation from the employee PRIOR to allow access to 
the facility per this circular. If verification cannot be 
obtained, the individual is not to be allowed in the facility.  
REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL VISITORS 
● Upon admittance, report immediately to the main office 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-12 
Page 4 of 7 
 
(staff allowing entrance to the facility should confirm arrival 
to the main office and sign-in etc.). 
● Present photo identification.  
● If an individual cannot produce a photo ID, staff should 
request another form of identification and/or gain 
confirmation from school staff that the person is known to 
the school. If additional support is needed to confirm 
identification, staff should obtain support from the head of 
school/principal or designee before authorizing a visit to 
continue. 
● Sign the visitor’s log, including full name, time in and time 
out, reason for visit, and affiliation (i.e., student, vendor, 
department, agency etc.). Please see Superintendent 
Circular LGL-04, School Visitors Guidelines. 
● After completing the sign-in process, all visitors are to 
remain in the main office, or designated area, while waiting 
for staff escort to appointments or meetings. All visitors 
must be in an area attended by staff to avoid any 
unauthorized movement through the building for the 
duration of their visit. 
● If an authorized visitor states that they are wearing an ankle 
monitor or staff observes an ankle monitor on a visitor, staff 
should follow the procedures outlined above.   
 
HEAD OF THE SCHOOL AND FACULTY  
● Mandate that ALL visitors to the building be issued and 
prominently display a visitor identification badge received at 
the time of sign-in at the main office.  
● Identify designated meeting space, close to the main office, 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-12 
Page 5 of 7 
 
to prevent visitors from moving throughout the building. 
Classroom access should be limited to special events and 
open houses.  
● Ensure the safety and security of students and the integrity 
of the school building entrances during recess, physical 
education, and activities that might occur outdoors, and 
during student arrival and dismissal times, by assigning staff 
to closely monitor all aspects of the movement of students 
and any open doors to accommodate transition in and out 
of the building. 
● Prohibit prospective BPS employees from beginning their 
work until they have been fully hired, and therefore CORI 
and SORI cleared by the Office of Human Capital. 
● Demand that any facilities and physical plant contractors 
slated to work in the building prominently display their 
green BPS identification cards, which demonstrate that they 
have been CORI and SORI cleared.  
● Prohibit staff (including all vendors, contractors, and staff 
from other departments), students, or others from 
“propping open” doors or creating other potential 
inconspicuous means of unauthorized entry into the school 
building. 
District personnel will look for these elements when reviewing 
school safety plans. In addition, specialists from BPS Safety 
Services will conduct proactive site visits to assist and provide 
input and support on school access control. 
School safe mode and internal threat procedures should be 
explicitly planned, discussed, and documented by all staff 
members.  In addition to conducting evacuation procedure drills, 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-12 
Page 6 of 7 
 
school safe mode drills must be conducted in September and 
January of each school year (see Supt. Circular FSE-08, Safe Mode 
and Internal Threat Drill Procedures). 
All staff members must exercise extreme vigilance regarding 
school building security: remain alert for trespassers, unsecured 
doors, and/or suspicious persons or activity around the school. 
School employees should not compromise their own safety or 
that of students when undertaking these security measures. 
Sound judgment and reasonable action by all school-based 
personnel are expected. Any potential threats to student or staff 
safety should be reported at once to the principal/head of school 
or their designee (in the event they are out of the building).   
RELATED SUPERINTENDENT CIRCULARS 
● LGL-04 School Visitor Guidelines 
● FSE-01 School Safety Contingency Plans 
● SAF-07 Metal Detectors 
● SAF-08 Release of Students to Authorized Persons 
● SAF-11 Sexual Offender Registry Information (S.O.R.I.) 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-12 
Page 7 of 7 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Safety 
Department: 
Safety Services 
Mailing Address: 
213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000 
Fax: 
617-635-8006 
Email: 
Operations-Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


