Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
SSS-02 
Version 01 
 
HOMELESS STUDENTS — GUIDELINES AND 
PROCEDURES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or 
superseded by a subsequent version 
INTRODUCTION 
The McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, reauthorized in 
December 2015 through the federal Every Student Succeeds Act 
(ESSA), ensures educational rights and protection for children 
and youth experiencing homelessness.  
DEFINITION OF HOMELESSNESS  
The federal government defines a child or youth who is homeless 
as one who lacks a fixed regular and adequate residence or has a 
primary nighttime residence not designed for or ordinarily used 
as a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings. 
(McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, Section 103 (A) (1) (2)).  
Under the federal definition, the following children are 
considered homeless:  
• Children and youth who are sharing the housing of other 
persons due to loss of housing, economic hardship, or a 
similar reason; are living in motels, hotels, trailer parks, or 
camping grounds due to lack of alternative adequate 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 2 of 10 
 
accommodations; are living in emergency or transitional 
shelters; are abandoned in hospital; or are awaiting foster 
care placement.  
• Children and youth who have a primary nighttime residence 
that is a public or private place not designed for or ordinarily 
used as a regular sleeping accommodation for human 
beings.  
• Children and youth who are living in cars, parks, public 
spaces, abandoned buildings, substandard housing, bus or 
train stations, or similar settings. 
• Unaccompanied youth – youth not in the physical custody 
of a parent or guardian.  
Boston Public Schools (BPS) is responsible for ensuring the 
identification, enrollment, attendance, and academic success of 
students who are homeless. All personnel should be aware of the 
unique needs of children, adolescents, and families who are 
homeless. This growing population may be at risk due to the 
transitional nature and status of their lives. For children and 
adolescents, school may represent stability and consistency in 
what otherwise is often an unstable situation. We are committed 
to supporting our students who are experiencing homelessness 
and strive to keep students in their home schools.  
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND SCOPE  
This circular is intended to provide school staff with guidance 
regarding the rights of students who are homeless and provide 
them with the education services needed to ensure they have an 
equal opportunity to meet the same academic standards to 
which all students are held. There are, however, some procedures 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 3 of 10 
 
that may differ from the standard procedures. These may include 
choice of school, registration, transportation, record transfer, and 
confidentiality.  
SCHOOL SELECTION 
A student who is experiencing homelessness has the right to 
continue attending the school of origin (i.e., the school they were 
attending when permanently housed or the school in which they 
were last enrolled) or a school within the new community where 
they are temporarily housed. This right is guaranteed under the 
McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act. 
SCHOOL ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSPORTATION  
If a student who is attending the Boston Public Schools becomes 
homeless and needs transportation, the family should visit one of 
the BPS Welcome Centers: 
https://www.bostonpublicschools.org/welcomecenters 
Families requesting reassignment should also visit any of the 
Welcome Centers at various locations:  
• Roslindale: 515 Hyde Park Ave. Roslindale, 617-635-8040  
• Dorchester: 1216 Dorchester Ave. Dorchester, 617-635-8015  
• Roxbury: 2300 Washington St., Roxbury, 617-635-9010  
• East Boston: 312 Border Street, Boston, MA 02128,  
617-635-9597  
Families who are experiencing homelessness and move into 
Boston have the right to enroll their children in the Boston Public 
Schools. They should go to any Welcome Center Site to register. 
An individual may be considered to be homeless if that person is 
“doubled-up,” a term that refers to a situation where individuals 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 4 of 10 
 
are unable to maintain their housing situation and are forced to 
stay with a series of friends and/or extended family members.  
Students who become homeless and move to a shelter or other 
facilities outside the school district may continue to attend their 
school of origin. Transportation will be available if they reside 
within an hour of their school. Please contact the Homeless 
Education Resource Network (HERN) or 617-6359620 to discuss 
any difficulty that a child temporarily without a home may be 
experiencing.  
DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
If a dispute arises over enrollment and/or transportation, the local 
school district must immediately enroll the homeless student in 
the school in which enrollment is sought pending resolution of 
the dispute, and must provide the parent, guardian, or 
unaccompanied youth with both a written statement of the 
school placement decision and a notice of the right to appeal the 
decision. The school district must refer the unaccompanied 
youth, parent, or guardian to the homeless education liaison, who 
will expeditiously carry out the dispute resolution process. The 
final decision in such a situation resides with the Massachusetts 
commissioner of education.  
Reimbursement is available at the City of Boston mileage rate for 
parents who are sheltered outside of Boston and transport their 
children back to the school district.  
ATTENDANCE WAIVERS 
Students experiencing homelessness may have absences 
excused and will be assessed on a case-by-case basis.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 5 of 10 
 
An absence may be excused for the following reasons:  
• Students who are homeless in or out of district and are 
awaiting transportation.  
• Students who are tardy due to placement issues.  
Please contact Assistant Director, Opportunity Youth, for further 
information (Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org) 
SCHOOL ENROLLMENT AND RECORD TRANSFER  
Principals and heads of school should follow all current 
procedures for the transfer of academic and health records for 
students who are experiencing homelessness. Although not 
mandated, it is helpful if students who are temporarily without 
homes provide the following documentation at the time of 
registration:  
• Birth certificate  
• Immunization and medical records  
• Special Education Individual Educational Plan (IEP)  
SERVICES FOR STUDENTS WHO ARE HOMELESS AND NOT 
LIVING IN SHELTERS 
Students not living in shelters and are “doubled-up” and identify 
themselves as being homeless will have access to all services as 
outlined in this memorandum.  
A. Curriculum on Homeless Issues/Professional Development  
It is important to teach all staff and students about homelessness 
and its causes and conditions to ensure all students understand 
that homelessness is caused by lack of affordable housing and 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 6 of 10 
 
not the fault of a child temporarily without a home or their 
parent. The BPS Homeless Education Resource Network (HERN), 
as well as the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and 
Secondary Education, have several videos on homelessness 
available as well as expertise in workshop and curriculum 
planning. In addition, training and seminars on homelessness are 
available through HERN and are free to Boston Public Schools 
faculty and staff. To arrange for these at your school or to enroll in 
an upcoming professional development opportunity, contact 
Assistant Director, Opportunity Youth Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
Identification of a School-based Homeless Liaison  
Each school in the district must identify one staff member 
to serve as the main contact point for homeless services if 
one does not already exist (e.g., the school-based homeless 
liaison) to work in concert with HERN to connect the school 
and students and families experiencing homelessness, or at 
risk of homelessness, to city and state resources. The school-
based homeless liaison works collaboratively with HERN to 
ensure that students experiencing homelessness have the 
necessary individualized resources and support to learn. 
HERN provides multiple opportunities for school-based 
homeless liaisons to receive targeted professional 
development throughout the school year. School-based 
homeless liaisons serve an essential role in ensuring that all 
staff and students in their school understand the available 
services and process to request assistance.  
By October 1, school leaders should submit the name, contact 
information and title of their designated school-based homeless 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 7 of 10 
 
liaison to the Senior Director of Opportunity Youth Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
Identification and Referrals of Students Experiencing 
Homelessness  
Students and families experiencing homelessness or at risk 
of homelessness may request assistance using the HERN 
referral form, which is available electronically on the ASPEN 
Student Information System (SIS). A student or family 
member may request that any BPS staff member with 
ASPEN access submit a referral form on their behalf. This 
process increases access to assistance by allowing the 
referral to be submitted by a BPS staff member with whom 
the student or family member has a trusting relationship. 
This process will also increase the identification of students 
experiencing homelessness by making it easier for students 
and family members to make the request at the school level. 
School-based homeless liaisons are expected to inform all 
staff members in their school of the availability of the form 
on ASPEN and their role in being able to submit a referral on 
the student’s behalf. Once the form is submitted, HERN will 
proceed with its normal process of verifying the information. 
Once information has been verified and the student’s 
service needs have been identified, HERN will contact the 
designated school-based liaison to work collaboratively to 
institute a service plan for the student and/or family. The 
hard copy version of the HERN referral form will still be 
accepted and can be submitted directly to the HERN office 
or any of the three BPS Welcome Centers. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 8 of 10 
 
CONFIDENTIALITY  
For many reasons, homeless families may not want to reveal that 
their living status has changed. While most shelters encourage 
parents to notify the schools of a change in residence, they 
cannot mandate it, since state and federal laws which regulate 
confidentiality are very restrictive. Children who are temporarily 
without homes present many of the same characteristics as 
other at-risk children. Therefore, the best practice is to 
strengthen the communications between all parents and school 
personnel so that procedures are in place to reach out to families 
and students who are in transition or educationally at-risk. This 
means, at a minimum, schools should communicate frequently 
with parents and stress the necessity of updating the student’s 
emergency information.  
Schools, and school-based homeless liaisons in particular, are 
encouraged to maintain up-to-date records of students 
experiencing homelessness in the ASPEN SIS and communicate 
with HERN regularly to ensure adequate assistance and provision 
of services to students and families experiencing homelessness.  
In serving students who are homeless, please be mindful of the 
following:  
• Many students and parents who are temporarily without 
homes prefer to keep their current living situations private.  
• Students and their families may feel threatened and/or 
embarrassed if approached by school staff. Thus, to respect 
their privacy and confidentiality, school staff should not 
approach students or their families directly to discuss their 
temporary lack of permanent residence. Rather, students 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 9 of 10 
 
and families should be given the opportunity to raise the 
issue themselves if they so choose.  
• It may not be necessary for staff members to know that a 
student is homeless. Thus, school staff should be told this 
information on an as needed basis only.  
In the event of an emergency, or when services and information 
are lacking for a child believed to be homeless, contact Assistant 
Director, Opportunity Youth at 617-6359620 or Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
Senior Director of Health Services, 617-635-6788, should be 
notified if families do not present current immunization records 
at the time of registration.  
Home and Hospital Instruction provides services for students 
who are homeless and are impaired physically and/or mentally. 
For additional information, contact Home and Hospital program 
coordinator, 617-635-6633.  
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 10 of 10 
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner:  
Senior Director 
Department:  
Department of Opportunity Youth 
Mailing Address:  443 Warren Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone:  
617-635-9620 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


