Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SSS-07 
Version 01 
 
 
 
 
“PERSISTENTLY DANGEROUS” SCHOOLS –  
STANDARDS FOR DETERMINATION 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version 
 
BACKGROUND  
Section 9532 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
(ESEA), as amended by the Every Student Succeeds Act of 2015 
(ESSA) states: 
Each State receiving funds under this chapter shall establish 
and implement a statewide policy requiring that a student 
attending a persistently dangerous public elementary 
school or secondary school, as determined by the State in 
consultation with a representative sample of local 
educational agencies, or who becomes a victim of a violent 
criminal offense, as determined by State law, while in or on 
the grounds of a public elementary school or secondary 
school that the student attends, be allowed to attend a safe 
public elementary school or secondary school within the 
local educational agency, including a public charter school. 
20 U.S.C. § 7912. 
  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-07 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 
STANDARDS 
The Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education, at a meeting of the State Board of Education on 
March 25, 2003, established the standards to determine an 
“unsafe” or “persistently dangerous” school. A school may be 
deemed unsafe either as a whole entity or for an individual 
student who becomes a victim of a violent criminal offense. 
These standards were implemented as of July 1, 2003. Following 
are the standards for (1) individual students and (2) the whole 
school determination. 
 
INDIVIDUAL STUDENT OPTION 
Beginning in the 2003/2004 school year, any student who during 
school hours becomes a victim of a “violent criminal offense” (as 
defined by Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 140, Section 121) 
which takes place in or on the grounds of a public elementary or 
secondary school that the student attends must be allowed, to 
the extent feasible, to transfer immediately to another public 
school within the school district. For purposes of this policy, “in or 
on the grounds” of the school includes school premises, school 
buses, and attendance at school sponsored or school related 
events including athletic games and field trips.  
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-07 
Page 3 of 6 
 
 
 
WHOLE SCHOOL OPTION 
To be designated as “persistently dangerous,” a school must 
meet either of the following criteria for three consecutive years 
beginning with the most recent enrollment data available to the 
Department, as well as the prior two years: 
 
• One or more students have been expelled for violation of 
the Federal Gun-Free Schools Act, v.z. Section 7.3.1. of the 
BPS Code of Discipline (October 2006 ed), or; 
 
• The number of students who have been expelled from 
school for a period greater than 45 days under Mass. 
General Laws Chapter 71, Section 37H for weapons or 
physical assaults or for violent crimes as defined by Mass. 
General Laws Chapter 140, Section 121 exceeds 1.5% of the 
student enrollment. The rate will be based on each 
individual school’s enrollment data submitted to the 
Department (i.e., October Report). 
 
Students who qualify for a safety transfer under either of the 
aforementioned options will be transferred through the safety 
transfer process (Superintendent’s Circular AMT-07, Safety 
Transfer Request Procedures). Documentation of a “violent 
criminal offense” must be attached to the safety transfer request 
form in the case of a single student option request. It is 
anticipated that the Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education (DESE) will designate schools as “persistently 
dangerous” based on the aforementioned criteria prior to the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-07 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 
start of school each year. Such a designation will be forwarded 
directly to the superintendent by the Massachusetts Department 
of Elementary and Secondary Education. 
 
REMEDIAL ACTION 
For any school that meets either standard for a “persistently 
dangerous “ school designation for two consecutive years, 
DESE will request that the school and district evaluate their needs 
and adopt or revise a corrective action plan to ensure a safe school 
environment for all students and staff. The school and district shall 
maintain the corrective action plan as a public record. To the 
extent feasible, DESE will provide technical assistance to the 
school and district. 
 
For any school that meets either standard for a “persistently 
dangerous “ school designation for three consecutive years, 
DESE will designate the school as “persistently dangerous.” 
Parents may then exercise their right to have their child attend a 
safe public elementary or secondary school within the local 
educational agency (school district). The school will be required to 
submit a corrective action plan to DESE. To the extent feasible, 
DESE will collaborate with other state and local agencies to 
provide support and technical assistance to the school and 
district. 
If DESE notifies a school or district that the school is or may be 
designated as “persistently dangerous,” school officials will have 
ten working days to present information to DESE that may have a 
bearing on the designation. The local officials’ response may 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-07 
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
include any or all of the following: 
 
1. Clarification of the disciplinary incident data submitted 
2. The school’s safety plan 
3. Local efforts to address the school’s safety concerns 
4. The school safety data reported to the state consistent with 
requirements of ESEA, Title IVA 
5. Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act, section 
4112 (c) (3) 
6. More current data that the school may have available 
7. Any extenuating circumstances 
8. Any other information the school officials believe may be 
relevant  
 
The Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education will review the information provided by the school 
officials before making a final determination. 
It is important to note that failure to transfer a student in a timely 
manner as required by the law and the Massachusetts 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education could result 
in the loss of federal funds. 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-07 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Deputy Superintendent of Operations 
Department: 
Deputy Superintendent of Operations 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9643 
E-mail: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


