Page 1:
 
 
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SSS-18 
Version 01 
 
 
BULLYING PREVENTION AND INTERVENTION PLAN  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version.  
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS STATEMENT AGAINST STUDENT 
BULLYING  
Boston Public Schools will not tolerate any unlawful or disruptive 
behavior, including bullying, harassment, cyberbullying, 
discrimination, retaliation, or hate crimes in all forms and types 
towards others in any school or at school-related activities. Boston 
Public Schools will promptly investigate all reports and 
complaints of bullying and take prompt, effective action to end 
that behavior and prevent its recurrence. Action will include, 
where appropriate, referral to a law enforcement agency. Boston 
Public Schools will support this Bullying Prevention and 
Intervention Plan (“Plan”) in all aspects of its activities, including 
its curricula, instructional programs, staff development, family 
meetings/training, and extracurricular activities.  
Students, staff, families/caregivers, and any others who are 
concerned or want to report bullying may confidently talk to a 
trusted staff member or call the Safe Space and Bullying 
Prevention Hotline, 617-592-2378. Additional resources and 
support can be found at Succeed Boston. Succeed Boston leads 
this districtwide initiative.  


Page 2:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 2 of 44 
 
The Student Handbook, AUP (Acceptable Use Policy), and the 
Boston Public Schools Code of Conduct are updated annually to 
assure alignment, to include language prohibiting bullying, and 
cyberbullying, and to clearly define the consequences connected 
to it. The district and principals/heads of schools at all levels in the 
Boston Public Schools play a critical role in the ongoing 
development and implementation of the Bullying Prevention and 
Intervention Plan in the context of other whole school and 
community efforts to promote a positive school climate.  
Principals/school leaders have a primary role in teaching students 
to be civil to one another and promoting understanding of and 
respect for diversity and difference. Principals/school leaders have 
a responsibility for setting priorities and for staying up to date 
with this policy and current research on ways to prevent and 
effectively respond to bullying.  
The Boston Public Schools will not tolerate any unlawful or 
disruptive behavior, including any form of bullying, cyberbullying, 
or retaliation, in our school buildings, on school grounds, on 
school buses and at school bus stops, on a school bus or other 
vehicle owned, leased, or used by a school district; or through the 
use of technology or an electronic device owned, leased, or used  
by a school district, and or in school-related activities.  
Schools will promptly investigate all reports and complaints of 
bullying, cyberbullying, and retaliation and take prompt action to 
end that behavior and restore the target’s sense of safety. The 
Boston Public Schools will support this commitment in all aspects 
of our school community, including curricula, instructional 
programs, staff development, extracurricular activities, and 
families/caregivers involvement.  
A student who knowingly makes a false accusation of bullying will 


Page 3:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 3 of 44 
 
be subject to disciplinary action as defined by the BPS Code of 
Conduct.   
This Plan has been approved by the Massachusetts Department of  
Elementary and Secondary Education and is posted at the BPS 
Anti Bulling web page. Copies of this plan  shall be posted and 
readily accessible in all schools in an area visible to 
families/caregivers and staff.  The Plan will be reviewed and 
updated biennially, as mandated by M.G.L. c. 71, §  37O.  
PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT  
As required by M.G.L. c. 71, § 37O, this Plan has been developed in  
consultation with various constituencies. Since May 3, 2010, the  
Boston Public Schools has met biennially with families/caregivers, 
teachers, school administrators,  students, central administrators, 
and community stakeholders to  develop this Plan.   
Effective SY 2024-2025, an advisory group of teachers, 
administrators, families/caregivers and community members will 
be developed to review and make recommendations related to 
curricula, professional development, community and family 
engagement, and the Plan itself.  Consultation will include, at a 
minimum, notice and a public comment period prior to adoption.   
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE  
The Boston Public Schools believes that school communities 
serve as a network of support for its diverse students, families, and 
staff.  We are committed to providing our students with equal 
educational opportunities and a safe and welcoming learning 
environment where all students and community members treat 
each other with respect and appreciate the rich diversity in our 
schools.  


Page 4:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 4 of 44 
 
The Boston Public Schools recognizes that certain students may 
be more vulnerable to become targets of bullying, harassment, or 
teasing based on actual or perceived characteristics, including 
race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, socioeconomic, 
status, homelessness, academic status, gender identity or 
expression, physical appearance, or sensory, disability, or by 
association with a person who has or is perceived to have one or 
more of these characteristics. The Boston Public Schools will 
continuously work to identify specific steps it will take to create a 
safe, supportive environment for vulnerable populations in the 
school community, and provide all students with the skills, 
knowledge, and strategies to prevent or respond to bullying, 
harassment, or teasing. 
Under M.G.L. Ch. 71, § 37O, at the beginning of each school year, 
each school will provide the community, including students, 
administrators, external providers, families/caregivers, and staff 
with: 
● Written notice of its policies for reporting acts of bullying 
and retaliation, 
● A description of the reporting procedures and resources, 
including the name and contact information of the 
principal/school leader or designee 
● A copy of the Bullying Incident Reporting Form and 
information about electronic reporting and  
● Shall provide and post the available resources (including the 
number to the Safe Space and Bullying Hotline and 
information about electronic reporting) in the school’s main 
office, the school’s website, all counseling offices/spaces, the 
school nurse’s office, and other locations determined by the  


Page 5:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 5 of 44 
 
principal/school leader or designee 
The Boston Public Schools Bullying Prevention and Intervention 
Plan shall be incorporated in student and staff handbooks, on the 
school and district website, and made available to 
families/caregivers.  
DEFINITIONS UNDER M.G.L. CH. 71, § 37O  
Note: The following definitions contain terms and/or phrases that 
are different from the language of the statute. The language of 
the definitions in this circular is drafted to align with the 
definitions that are used in the Boston Public Schools Code of 
Conduct. BPS relies on these definitions when reviewing student 
conduct under the Code:   
● Bullying: BPS has replaced the word “victim” in the statute 
with the word “target.”  
● Cyberbullying: BPS has added (iv) to the definition contained 
in the statute.  
● Retaliation: this definition is not provided for under the 
statute but is operative in the Code of Conduct. 
● School Community: BPS has added “staff” to the definition 
contained in the statute.   
● Perpetrator: this definition is not provided for under the 
statute but is operative in the Code of Conduct. 
● Aggressor is a student who engages in bullying or 
cyberbullying. 
Bullying is the repeated use by one or more students or by a 
member of school staff including, but not limited to, an educator, 


Page 6:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 6 of 44 
 
administrator, school nurse, cafeteria worker, custodian, bus  
driver, athletic coach, advisor to an extracurricular activity, or  
paraprofessional of a written, verbal, or electronic expression or a  
physical act or gesture or any combination thereof, directed at a  
target that:  
I. 
Causes physical or emotional harm to the target or damage 
to the target's property  
II. 
Places the target in reasonable fear of harm to themselves 
or of damage to their property  
III. 
Creates a hostile environment at school for the target  
IV. 
Infringes on the rights of the target at school  
V. 
Materially and substantially disrupts the education process 
or the orderly operation of a school.  
Cyberbullying is bullying through the use of technology or any 
electronic communication which shall include, but shall not be 
limited to, any transfer of signs, signals, writing, images, sounds,  
data, or intelligence of any nature transmitted in whole or in part 
by a wire, radio, electromagnetic, photoelectric or photo-optical 
system, including, but not limited to, electronic mail, internet  
communications, instant messages or facsimile communications.  
Cyber-bullying shall also include:  
I. 
The creation of a web page or blog in which the creator 
assumes the identity of another person  
II. 
The knowing impersonation of another person as the author 
of posted content or messages, if the creation or 
impersonation creates any of the conditions enumerated in 


Page 7:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 7 of 44 
 
clauses (iv) to (v), inclusive, of the definition of bullying  
III. 
The distribution by electronic means of a communication to 
more than one person or the posting of material on an 
electronic medium that may be accessed by one or more 
persons, if the distribution or posting creates any of the 
conditions enumerated in clauses (i) to (v), inclusive, of  the 
definition of bullying  
IV. 
The use of the internet and/or social media used for bullying 
outside of school that disrupts the normal functioning of the 
school day.  
 
 
 


Page 8:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 8 of 44 
 
Hostile Environment is a situation in which bullying causes the 
school environment to be permeated with intimidation, ridicule, 
or insult that is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the 
conditions of a student’s education.  
Retaliation is any form of intimidation, reprisal, or harassment 
directed against a student who reports bullying, provides 
information during an investigation of bullying, or witnesses or 
has reliable information about bullying.   
The School Community consists of students, staff and 
families/caregivers. 
Staff includes, but is not limited to, educators, administrators, 
counselors, school nurses, cafeteria workers, custodians, bus 
drivers, athletic coaches, advisors to extracurricular activities, 
support staff, and paraprofessionals.  
Target is a student against whom bullying, cyberbullying, or 
retaliation has been perpetrated.  
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR REPORTING AND 
RESPONDING TO BULLYING AND RETALIATION  
To support efforts to respond promptly and effectively to bullying 
and retaliation, the Boston Public Schools have policies and 
procedures in place for receiving and responding to reports of 
bullying or retaliation. These policies and procedures ensure that 
members of the school community – students, 
families/caregivers, and staff – know what will happen when 
incidents of bullying are reported or occur (Attachment 1).   
The Boston Public Schools, in accordance with MA Law M.G.L. c. 


Page 9:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 9 of 44 
 
71, § 37O, has designated the principal/school leader or designee 
as the person responsible for receiving reports, recording 
incidents, and investigating all incidents.  The principal/head of 
school or designee is responsible for responding to and resolving 
all cases. All bullying allegations, no matter how they were 
reported, (e.g., through the Safe Space and Bullying reporting 
form or directly to the school leader, or directly to staff at the 
school), shall be submitted to Succeed Boston using the Safe 
Schools & Bullying Investigation form. All findings, including 
supporting information, including witness statements (target, 
aggressor, and any other relevant person) findings, and 
conclusions, shall be submitted to Succeed Boston within five 
school days, and findings of bullying shall be documented in the 
BPS Student Information System (SIS). 
A. Reporting Bullying or Retaliation  
Reports of bullying or retaliation can be made by staff,  students, 
families/caregivers or others, and can  be submitted through the 
Safe Space and Bullying Prevention Hotline at 617-592-2378 or 
directly online  through the Safe Schools and Bullying Prevention 
Incident Reporting Form. To report in your native language, 
please call the Hotline and ask for translation services. Allegations 
may also be submitted via email, text, or through the Bullying 
Incident Reporting Form (Attachment 3).  
All employees are required to report immediately to the 
principal/school leader or designee, any instance of bullying or 
retaliation the staff member becomes aware of or witnesses.   
Reports may be made anonymously (see Attachment 3 for the 
Boston Public Schools Safe Schools and Bullying Prevention and 
Intervention Reporting Form and Attachment 4 for the Boston 


Page 10:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 10 of 44 
 
Public Schools Safe Schools and Bullying Prevention and 
Intervention Anonymous Reporting Form).  
Use of the Boston Public Schools Safe Schools and Bullying 
Prevention and Intervention Reporting Form is not required as a 
condition to making a report.   
1. Reporting by Staff  
A staff member shall report immediately to the principal/school 
leader or designee when they witness or become aware of 
conduct that may be bullying or retaliation. The requirement to 
report to the principal/school leader or designee does not limit 
the authority of the staff member to respond to behavioral or 
disciplinary incidents consistent with each school’s policies and 
procedures for behavior management and discipline. 
2. Reporting by Students, Families/Caregivers, and Others  
Boston Public Schools expects students, families/caregivers, and 
others who witness or become aware of an instance of bullying or 
retaliation involving a student to report it to the principal/school 
leader or designee.  
Reports may be made anonymously or not by calling the Safe 
Schools and Bullying Prevention Hotline (617-592-2378) or filing a 
report online using the Safe Space and Bullying Prevention 
Reporting form. No disciplinary action will be taken against an 
alleged aggressor solely based on an anonymous report. 
Students, families/caregivers, and others may request assistance 
from a staff member to complete a written report. Students will 
be provided practical, safe, private, and age-appropriate ways to 
report and discuss an incident of bullying with a staff member or 
with the principal/school leader.  


Page 11:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 11 of 44 
 
3. Responding to a report of bullying or retaliation  
Before fully investigating the allegations of bullying or retaliation, 
the principal/school leader or designee will take steps to assess 
the need to restore a sense of safety to the alleged target and/or 
to protect the alleged target from possible further incidents. The 
principal/school leader or designee shall contact the 
families/caregivers prior to any investigation. Notice will be 
consistent with state regulations at 603 CMR 49.00.  
Under M.G.L. c. 71, § 37O, for children with special needs, the 
Principal/Head of School will review the child’s IEP to 
determine whether or not the child’s disability impacted or 
impacts their ability to comply with the Code of Conduct 
and/or this policy, and where appropriate, convene a TEAM 
meeting to discuss and decide the appropriate 
determination which may include behavioral support 
services or other specialized services. 
The principal/Head of School or designee shall inform the parent 
or guardian of the target about the Department of Elementary 
and Secondary Education’s Problem Resolution System (PRS) and 
the process for accessing that system, regardless of the outcome 
of the bullying determination. 
Responses to promote safety may include, but not be limited to:  
● Creating a personal safety or support plan 
● Pre-determining seating arrangements for the target and/or 
the aggressor in the classroom, at lunch, or on the bus 
● Identifying a staff member who will act as a “safe person” for 
the target 
● Altering the aggressor’s schedule and access to the target.  


Page 12:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 12 of 44 
 
 
The principal/school leader or designee will take additional steps 
to promote safety during and after the investigation, as necessary. 
They will implement appropriate strategies to protect students 
from bullying or retaliation as a result of witnessing, providing 
information during an investigation, reporting bullying or 
retaliation or providing reliable information about a reported act 
of bullying or retaliation. 
The confidentiality of students and witnesses reporting alleged 
acts of bullying will be maintained to the extent possible, given 
the school’s obligation to investigate the matter.  
B. Obligations to Notify Others   
1. Notice to Families/Caregivers:  
Within 24 hours of receipt of the bullying complaint and before 
interviewing students, the principal/school leader or designee will 
notify the families/caregivers of the target and the aggressor of 
the allegations and their intent to interview their child.   
Families of all student witnesses who may be interviewed will be 
notified of their intent to interview their child.  Should they 
choose, the family has the right to be present for the interview 
with their child.  Upon completion of the investigation (not 
beyond five school  days after the receipt of the complaint), the 
principal/school leader will notify the families/caregivers of the 
target and the aggressor of the findings of the investigation and 
the  procedures used in responding to the complaint.  
To ensure the safety of students and compliance with all BPS 
mandates and State laws, repeated allegations from 
families/caregivers and/or no response from  the head of school 


Page 13:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 13 of 44 
 
will be forwarded to the Operational  Leader and the School 
Superintendent for follow-up assistance.    
2. Notice to Another School or District:  
If the reported incident involves students from more than one 
school district, charter school, nonpublic school, approved private 
special education day or residential  school, or collaborative 
school, the principal/school leader or designee first informed of 
the incident will promptly notify by telephone the principal/school 
leader or designee of the other school(s) of the incident so that  
each school may take appropriate action.  All communications will 
be in accordance with state and  federal privacy laws and 
regulations and 603 CMR 23.00. 
3. Notice to Law Enforcement:  
At any point after receiving a report of bullying or retaliation, 
including after an investigation, if the principal/school leader or 
designee has a reasonable basis to believe that criminal charges 
may be pursued against the aggressor, the principal/school leader 
shall consult with their Operational Leader, the School 
Superintendent, the Office of Safety Services and/or the Boston 
Police Department School Unit, and other individuals the 
principal/school leader or designee deems appropriate.   
Note that pursuant to 603 CMR 49.06(2), notification to law 
enforcement is not required in those situations in which the 
school leader determines that the bullying and retaliation can 
be handled appropriately within the school district or school.  
Also, if an incident occurs on school  grounds and involves a 
former student under the age of  21 who is no longer enrolled 
in school, the principal/head  of school or designee shall 
contact their Operational Leader, the School Superintendent, 
the Office of Safety Services and/or the Boston Police 
Department School Unit, for notification to law enforcement if 


Page 14:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 14 of 44 
 
they have a reasonable basis to believe that criminal charges 
may be pursued against the aggressor.   
In making this determination, the principal/School leader will, 
consistent with the Plan and with applicable school or district 
policies and procedures, consult with their Operational Leader, 
the School Superintendent, Office of Safety Services and/or the 
Boston Police Department School Unit and other  individuals 
the principal/school leader or designee deems appropriate.  
The Superintendent’s Office shall be notified.  
 
 


Page 15:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 15 of 44 
 
C. Investigation (see Attachment 1)  
The principal/school leader or designee will promptly investigate 
all reports of bullying or retaliation and, in doing so, will consider 
all available information known, including the nature of the 
allegation(s) and the ages of the students involved. All reports of 
staff on student bullying shall be investigated as such, and the 
Office of Labor Relations shall be notified.  
During the investigation, the school leader or their designee shall 
notify the families/caregivers of the intent to interview their child 
and will proceed (in the presence of the families/caregivers, if 
requested) to gather information, interview students, staff, 
witnesses, and others as necessary.  
The principal/school leader or designee will remind the alleged 
aggressor, target, and witnesses that retaliation is strictly 
prohibited and will result in disciplinary action, per section 7.6.3 of 
the Boston Public Schools Code of Conduct.  
Interviews will be conducted by the principal/school leader or 
designee, and in consultation with the school counselor, as 
appropriate.  To the extent practicable and given their obligation 
to investigate and address the matter, the principal/school leader 
or designee will maintain confidentiality during the investigative 
process. The  principal/school leader or designee will maintain a 
written  record of the investigation and upon completion, will file 
and forward the  Safe Schools and Bullying Prevention 
Investigation Form and any additional materials to 
saws@bostonpublicschools.org. 
Procedures for investigating reports of bullying and retaliation will 
be consistent with district policies and procedures for 
investigations and for possible disciplinary action. If necessary, the 


Page 16:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 16 of 44 
 
principal/school leader or designee will consult with Succeed 
Boston regarding consultation or appeals from 
families/caregivers. The Office of the Superintendent shall be 
notified should legal counsel pertaining to the investigation of the 
alleged report be necessary. (See Attachment 1 for more specifics.)  
D. Determinations  
The principal/school leader or designee will make a determination 
of bullying based upon the definition of bullying, the interviews 
with students, staff, and families/caregivers. If, after investigation, 
bullying or retaliation is substantiated, the principal/school leader 
or designee will take steps reasonably calculated to prevent 
recurrence and to ensure that the target is not restricted in 
participating in school or in benefiting from school activities.  
Within 5 days of receipt of the allegation, the principal/school 
leader or designee will:   
1. Determine what remedial action is required (e.g., 
Safety/Support Plan, seating plan), if any 
2. Determine what responsive actions and/or disciplinary 
action is necessary, if any  
3. Notify the families/caregivers of the target and the 
aggressor about the results of the investigation and, if 
bullying or retaliation is found, what action is being taken to 
prevent further acts of bullying or retaliation  
4. Submit the investigation and findings using the Safe 
Schools and Bullying Prevention Investigation Form and, if 
bullying was found, document the finding in the BPS SIS.  
Depending upon the circumstances, the principal/school leader or 
designee may choose to consult with the student’s teacher(s) 
and/or school counselor, and the target’s or aggressor’s 


Page 17:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 17 of 44 
 
families/caregivers, to identify any underlying social or emotional 
issue(s) that may have contributed to the bullying behavior and to 
assess the level of need for additional social skills development.   
All notices to families/caregivers must comply with applicable 
state and federal privacy laws and regulations. Because of the 
legal requirements regarding the confidentiality of student 
records, the principal/head of school or designee cannot report 
specific information to the target’s families/caregivers about the 
disciplinary action taken unless it involves a “stay away” order or 
other directives that the target must be aware of in order to 
report violations.   
For students with disabilities, the principal/school leader will 
review the child’s IEP to determine whether the child’s disability 
impacted or impacts their ability to comply with the Code of 
Conduct and/or this policy, and where appropriate, convene a 
TEAM meeting to discuss and decide  the appropriate 
determination which may include  behavioral support services or 
other specialized services.  
NEW: Right to Appeal decisions related to the bullying 
investigation, findings, and/or response may be submitted 
using this link.   
 
 


Page 18:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 18 of 44 
 
E. Planning & Oversight  
The following school or district leaders are responsible for the 
following tasks under the Plan: 
Task  
Responsible Party 
1) Receiving reports on bullying  
Succeed Boston, School 
Administrators, School Staff 
2) Collecting and analyzing building- 
and/or school-wide data on bullying 
to assess the present problem and to 
measure improved outcomes 
Succeed Boston, 
Superintendent’s Office, Office of 
Data and Accountability, 
RP/SAWS  
3) Creating a process for recording 
and tracking incident reports, and for 
accessing information related to 
targets and aggressors 
Succeed Boston, Office of Data 
and Accountability  
4) Planning for the ongoing 
professional development that is 
required by the law 
Succeed Boston 
5) Planning supports that respond to 
the needs of targets and aggressors 
Succeed Boston, RP/SAWS, 
Regional Liaison Teams 
6) Choosing and implementing the 
curricula that the school or district 
will use 
Succeed Boston, Office of Equity, 
Bullying Prevention and 
Intervention Advisory Group 


Page 19:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 19 of 44 
 
7) Developing new or revising current 
policies and protocols under the Plan, 
including an Internet Safety Plan, and 
designating key staff to be in charge 
of implementation 
Principals, school leaders, 
Succeed Boston, Office of the 
Legal Advisor, Office of Equity, 
Bullying Prevention and 
Intervention Advisory Group 
8) Amending district-wide and 
school-based student and staff 
handbooks and Codes of Conduct 
Succeed Boston, Operational 
Leaders, BPS Code of Conduct 
Team and Office of the Legal 
Advisor 
9) Leading the families/caregivers or 
family engagement efforts and 
drafting information materials 
Succeed Boston, Office of Family 
and Community Advancement, 
Parent University 
10) Reviewing and updating the Plan 
biennially, or more frequently as 
needed 
Superintendent’s Office, 
Succeed Boston, Bullying 
Prevention and Intervention 
Advisory Group, Office of the 
Legal Advisor, Office of Equity 
As required by Chapter 86, of the Acts 
of 2014, which amended G.L. c. 71, 
§37O, the Boston Public Schools will 
administer a department-developed 
student survey at least once every 
four years to assess “school climate 
and the prevalence, nature and 
severity of bullying in schools.” (G.L. c. 
71, §37O(k)). This may include results 
of the student/staff/family climate 
Succeed Boston, Office of Data 
and Accountability, Operational 
Team 
 
 


Page 20:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 20 of 44 
 
survey. 
 
Each school community member is responsible for:  
1. complying with this Plan, where applicable  
2. ensuring that they do not harass, discriminate against, or 
commit a crime against another person on school grounds 
or in a school-related activity because of that person’s race, 
color, religion, national origin, ethnicity, sex, sexual 
orientation, age, or disability   
3. ensuring that they do not bully another person on 
school grounds or in a school-related activity  
4. ensuring that they do not retaliate against any other 
person for reporting or filing a complaint, for aiding or 
encouraging the filing or a report or complaint, or for 
cooperating in an investigation of harassment, bullying, 
discrimination, or a hate crime   
 
5. cooperating in the investigation of reports or complaints 
of harassment, bullying discrimination, retaliation, or a hate 
crime.  
TRAINING & PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT  
As required under M. G. L. c. 71, § 37O, Boston Public Schools 
requires annual bullying prevention and intervention training 
(available in person or asynchronously) for all school staff, 
including lunch monitors, school police officers, secretaries, bus 


Page 21:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 21 of 44 
 
drivers, teachers, administrators, and all other itinerant staff.  All 
training is posted on Vector. For more information contact 
Succeed Boston @ the Counseling and Intervention Center, (617) 
635-8123.  
Annual Staff Training on the Plan  
Boston Public Schools will offer professional development to all 
administrators, teachers, paraprofessionals, and all ancillary staff 
members under the employment of the Boston Public Schools.  
This includes Identifying Bullying Behavior, Types of Bullying, 
Roles of Aggressors/Targets/Bystanders, Rights and 
Responsibilities under the Law M. G. L. c. 71, § 37O, Information 
regarding the most-risk populations (including LGBTQ+ students, 
students with disabilities, English Language Learners), Internet 
Safety, Reporting Responsibility, Adult Bias, and Addressing 
Student Bias-Based Speech and Behavior.  
Advanced Training 
To provide effective bullying prevention and intervention services 
and to build capacity, each school shall have at least 2 staff 
trained as Bullying   
Intervention Specialists (BIS). These specialists will:  
● Serve as a resource to their school community on bullying 
related matters 
● Lead relevant training within their school community 
● Coordinate the reporting and/or investigating of incidents if 
designated by their school leader. 
The Regional RP/SAWS will provide semi-annual training to the 
regional BIS teams that will further develop best practices and 


Page 22:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 22 of 44 
 
resources.   
Boston Public Schools will provide a 2-day Bullying Intervention 
Specialist professional development quarterly throughout the 
year. The advanced bullying intervention specialist training (see 
Attachment 2) will be posted on Vector.  
The training will include:   
i. developmentally appropriate strategies to prevent and 
intervene in bullying incidents   
ii. information regarding the complex interaction and 
power differential that can take place between and 
among an aggressor, target, and witnesses to the 
bullying   
iii. research findings on bullying, and resources for the 
development of programs in schools   
iv. information on the incidence and nature of 
cyberbullying and internet safety issues  
v. bias-based bullying and sexual harassment 
vi. issues specific to LGBTQ+ students  
viii. students with disabilities 
● legal rights/IDEA/FAPE  
ix. adult bias and impact on bullying intervention 
and prevention.  
● The Regional RP/SAWS will continue to share literature 
covering the latest information in bullying prevention & 
intervention.  This literature will include strategies for 


Page 23:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 23 of 44 
 
creating a culture and environment that will prevent 
bullying.   
● Professional Development opportunities to identify 
strategies for students with disabilities who are either 
accused of or are targets of bullying (per BPS Code of 
Conduct).   
● Annual updated electronic links to the Bullying Prevention 
and Intervention Protocols.   
 
 


Page 24:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 24 of 44 
 
 
ACCESS TO RESOURCES AND SERVICES  
A key aspect of promoting positive school climates that provide 
students with feelings of belonging and safety is ensuring that 
the underlying emotional needs of all students are addressed. 
These students include targets, aggressors, and bystanders of 
bullying or cyberbullying. The Boston Public Schools will also 
address the emotional needs of these students’ families.  Please 
see Anti-Bullying Resources for further information.  
Identifying resources in schools   
● School staff, together with building administrators, will work 
to identify the school’s capacity to provide counseling, case 
management, and other services for students (targets, 
aggressors, bystanders) and their families.  Curricula and 
resources can be accessed through the Boston Public 
School’s Succeed Boston’s website succeedboston.org  
● Schools will conduct an annual review of staffing and 
programs that support the creation of positive school 
environments, focusing on early interventions and intensive 
services, and develop recommendations and action steps to 
fill resource and service gaps.   
● The Boston Public Schools will continue to work in 
collaboration with local and state agencies to adopt 
evidence-based curricula and to provide additional 
preventive services to students, families/caregivers and all 
school staff.   
 
 


Page 25:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 25 of 44 
 
 
Counseling and other services   
● Succeed Boston’s Student Support and Prevention 
Workshops  provide an alternative to a suspension to 
increase students’ understanding about the impact of 
bullying, build empathy and social and emotional skills to 
stop and prevent bullying.   
● School counselors, nurses, school psychologists, and special 
educators provide a variety of skill-based services to students 
within the educational setting that include ongoing 
emotional support, risk assessment, crisis intervention, and 
help with community-based counseling referrals when 
appropriate.   
● School staff meet with families/caregivers and teachers as 
needed to help address students’ academic, social, 
emotional, and behavioral concerns as collaboratively as 
possible.   
● Regional liaisons, especially the RP/SAWS, will work with 
school teams and administrators to develop and, if needed, 
co-facilitate culturally and linguistically appropriate 
resources to identified families.   
● School counselors maintain up-to-date information on 
community-based mental health referrals as well as 
Community Service Agencies (CSAs) within the local area, 
providing services to students and families.   
● Regional liaisons, especially the RP/SAWS, will work 
collaboratively with and support the BIS, school counselors, 
school psychologists, and intensive special needs educators 


Page 26:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 26 of 44 
 
to: 
1. Develop behavior plans and groups for students to build 
upon their social and emotional skills, 
2. Educate and support families/caregivers,   
3. Conduct workshops for families/caregivers 
4. Connect families/caregivers of outside resources to build 
skills    
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES   
As required by M. G. L. c. 71B, § 3, as amended by Chapter 92 of  the 
Acts of 2010, when the IEP Team determines that the student  has 
a disability that affects social skills development or the  student 
may participate in or is vulnerable to bullying,  harassment, or 
teasing because of their disability, the Team will  consider what 
should be included in the IEP to develop the  student’s skills and 
proficiencies to avoid and respond to bullying,  harassment, or 
teasing. 
REFERRAL TO OUTSIDE SERVICES   
Boston Public Schools school counselors and other specialists will 
help students and families access appropriate and timely services 
necessary to address student needs as a result of bullying.  
Referrals shall comply with relevant laws and policies.   
ACADEMIC & NON-ACADEMIC ACTIVITIES  
The Boston Public Schools will provide age-appropriate 
instruction on bullying prevention in each grade and incorporate 
it into the school’s or district’s curricula. Succeed Boston provides 
online Student Support and Prevention Workshops to students in 


Page 27:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 27 of 44 
 
grades 1-12 to learn about the impact of bullying and develop skills 
to stop and prevent bullying.   
Effective instruction will include classroom approaches, whole 
school initiatives, focused strategies for bullying prevention, and 
social skills development.   
Specific bullying prevention approaches:   
● Using scripts and role plays to develop skills.  
● Empowering students to take action by knowing what to do 
when they witness other students engaged in acts of 
bullying or retaliation, including seeking adult assistance.   
● Helping students understand the dynamics of bullying and 
cyberbullying, including the underlying power imbalance.  
● Build and reinforce student empathy.  
● Reinforce and elevate students who model being helpful 
bystanders 
● Emphasizing cyber safety, including safe and appropriate 
use of electronic communication technologies  
● Enhancing students’ skills for engaging in healthy 
relationships and resolving conflicts with respectful 
communications.  
● Engaging students in a safe, supportive school environment 
that  
● is respectful of diversity and difference.  
 
 


Page 28:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 28 of 44 
 
General teaching approaches that support bullying prevention 
efforts:  
● Create a strong anti-bullying plan that will be enforced first 
and foremost by adults   
● Build in learning and embed bullying in the curriculum (e.g., 
ELA, social studies, history, health classes)  
● Empower bystanders who witness bullying activities with 
skills and support to intervene appropriately  
● Promote acceptance and respect in order to improve the 
school climate to include all students in meaningful ways  
● Help students and staff understand the definition of bullying 
– what it is and what it isn’t (e.g., conflict, fighting, teasing)  
● Recognize the dynamics and complexities involved in 
aggressor-target relationships  
● Develop intervention programs that will reduce the 
prevalence of bullying behaviors and create a safe school 
climate that fosters positive learning experiences for all 
students  
● Be creative in developing strategies to promote social 
competence for children who are aggressors, targets of 
bullying, and bystanders 
● Develop ways to help students who are aggressors find more 
prosocial ways of experiencing positive rewards  
● Build an effective support system for protecting targets of 
bullying.  


Page 29:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 29 of 44 
 
The Boston Public Schools has incorporated a range of 
individualized strategies and interventions that may be used in 
response to remediate a student’s skills or to prevent further 
incidents of bullying and/or retaliation. Combining and 
incorporating a Multi-Tiered System of Support (MTSS), social and 
emotional skill building, school-wide positive behavior 
interventions and supports (PBIS) focused on prevention services  
school-wide, creates a level change across the classroom, school,  
and district.  These changes not only improve outcomes but 
address and improve the academic and non-academic needs of 
all students, including students with disabilities.   
TEACHING APPROPRIATE BEHAVIOR THROUGH SKILL BUILDING  
Upon the principal/school leader or designee determining that 
bullying or retaliation has occurred, the law requires that the 
school or district use a range of responses that balance the need  
for accountability with the need to teach appropriate behavior.  
M.G.L. c. 71, § 37O.  
Skill-building approaches that the principal/school leader or 
designee may consider include:  
● referring students to Succeed Boston online Student 
Support and Prevention Workshops for students in grades 1- 
12 to learn about the impact of bullying and develop skills to  
stop and prevent bullying   
● providing relevant push in support and co-facilitation of 
educational and social and emotional skill building activities 
for individual students or groups of students, in consultation 
with school counselors and other appropriate school 
personnel  
● implementing a range of academic and nonacademic 


Page 30:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 30 of 44 
 
positive behavioral supports to help students understand 
prosocial ways to achieve their goals.  
● meeting with families/caregivers to support and to reinforce 
the anti-bullying curricula and social skills building activities 
at home 
● adopting support plans to include a focus on developing 
specific social skills; making a referral for evaluation.  
TAKING DISCIPLINARY ACTION  
If the principal/school leader or designee decides that disciplinary 
action is appropriate, the disciplinary action will be determined 
based on facts found by the principal/school leader  or designee, 
including the nature of the conduct, the age of the  student(s) 
involved, a child’s IEP where appropriate, and the need  to balance 
accountability with the teaching of appropriate  behavior.  
Discipline will be consistent with the Boston Public Schools 
Bullying Prevention and Intervention Plan, the Boston  Public 
Schools Code of Conduct, and with the school-based  student 
handbook.  Discipline procedures for students with disabilities are 
governed by the federal Individuals with  Disabilities Education 
Act (IDEA), which should be read in  cooperation with state laws 
regarding student discipline.  
If the principal/school leader or designee determines that a 
student knowingly made a false allegation of bullying or 
retaliation, that student may be subject to disciplinary action  
consistent with the BPS Code of Conduct.  
 
 


Page 31:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 31 of 44 
 
 
PROMOTING SAFETY FOR THE TARGET AND OTHERS 
The principal/school leader or designee(s) will consider what 
adjustments (including a safety/support/action plan) are needed 
in the school environment to assure the target's sense of safety 
and that of others.   
Within a reasonable period following the determination and the 
ordering of remedial and/or disciplinary action, the 
principal/school leader or designee will contact the target and the 
families/caregivers to determine whether there has been a 
recurrence of the prohibited conduct and whether additional 
supportive measures are needed. If so, the principal/school leader 
or designee will work with appropriate school staff to implement 
them immediately.  
COLLABORATION WITH FAMILIES/CAREGIVERS  
The Boston Public Schools Bullying Prevention and Intervention 
Plan includes strategies to engage and collaborate with students’ 
families/caregivers to increase the capacity of each of  our schools 
as well as the district to prevent and respond to  bullying. 
Resources for families/caregivers and communication with them 
are essential aspects of effective collaboration. The bullying 
prevention and intervention curricula used by the schools shall be 
made available to families/caregivers and include:  
1. How families/caregivers can reinforce the curricula at 
home and support the school or district plan 
2. The dynamics of bullying  
3. Online safety and cyberbullying 


Page 32:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 32 of 44 
 
Families/caregivers will also be notified in writing each year about 
the student-related sections of the Boston Public Schools Bullying 
Prevention and Intervention Plan and the Boston Public Schools 
Internet Acceptable Use Policy.  
Schools will collaborate with School Site Councils and parent 
organizations to create families/caregivers’ resources and 
information networks. Schools will join with these 
families/caregivers groups to offer education programs for them 
that are focused on the components of the anti-bullying curricula 
and any social competency curricula used by the school(s).   
Schools will annually inform families/caregivers of enrolled 
students about the anti-bullying curricula that are being used.  
This notice will include information about the dynamics of 
bullying, including cyberbullying and online safety.  All notices 
and information made available to families/caregivers will be in 
hard copy and electronic formats and will be available in the 
language(s) most prevalent in BPS.  Each school will post the 
Boston Public Schools Bullying Prevention and Intervention Plan 
and related information on its website.  
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS  
Consistent with state and federal laws and the policies of the 
school or district, no person shall be discriminated against in 
admission to a public school of any town or in obtaining the  
advantages, privilege, and courses of study of such public school  
on account of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, or sexual  
orientation. Nothing in the Boston Public Schools Bullying 
Prevention and Intervention Plan prevents the school or district  
from taking action to remediate discrimination or harassment 
based on a person’s membership, or perceived membership, in a 
legally protected category  under local, state, or federal law, or 


Page 33:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 33 of 44 
 
school or district policies. 
In addition, nothing in this Plan is designed or intended to limit 
the authority of the school or district to take disciplinary action or  
other action under M.G.L. c. 71, §§ 37H or 37H½, other applicable  
laws, or local school or district policies in response to violent,  
harmful, or disruptive behavior, regardless of whether this Plan  
covers the behavior. 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner: 
Senior Director of Succeed Boston @ the 
Counseling and Intervention Center 
Department:  
Succeed Boston @ the Counseling and 
Intervention Center 
Mailing 
Address:  
515 Hyde Park Ave, Roslindale, MA 02131 
Phone:  
617-635-8123 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
saws@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent  
 
 


Page 34:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 34 of 44 
 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
1. How to Conduct a Bullying Investigation  
2. Professional Development — Bullying Intervention Specialist 
Training  
3. Safe Schools and Bullying Prevention and Intervention 
Reporting Form  
 
 


Page 35:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 35 of 44 
 
ATTACHMENT 1: 
HOW TO COMPLETE A BULLYING INVESTIGATION 
Step 1: After contacting families/caregivers, set up a 
meeting with the alleged targeted student (target)  
Are there safety concerns? If yes, develop a safety plan with the 
input of the target and the families/caregivers.  
a. Consider class seating, bus, lunch, recess, and “specials.”   
b. With the help of the targeted student, identify a trusted 
adult the student can go to for assistance.  
● Notify the trusted adult of the plan.  
● Notify the teacher(s) of the allegation and the trusted 
adult.  
c. Consider an inconspicuous way the target could signal in 
real-time that something was happening and/or the target 
needed to leave the room to go to a prior agreed-upon class, 
office, person.  
d. Take a statement from the target and get the names of 
witnesses if any.  
Step 2: After contacting the families/caregivers of the alleged 
aggressor, set up a meeting with the student.  
Are there any safety concerns? If yes, develop a safety or action 
plan with the input of the aggressor and the families/caregivers.   
a. Consider class seating, bus, lunch, recess, and 
“specials.”   


Page 36:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 36 of 44 
 
b. With the help of the aggressor, identify a trusted adult 
the student can go to for assistance.  
c. Notify the trusted adult of the plan.  
d. Notify the teacher(s) of the allegation and the trusted 
adult.  
e. Consider an inconspicuous way the target could signal in 
real-time that something was happening, and/or the target 
needed to leave the room to go to a prior agreed-upon 
class, office, or person.  
If there are no safety concerns for the aggressor, develop an 
action plan that keeps the target and aggressor separate.   
a. Consider class seating arrangements, lunch bus, “specials” 
and recess.  
b. Notify the teacher(s) of the allegation, and any action 
plans developed.  
c. Take a statement from the alleged aggressor.  
Step 3: Document statements from all witnesses  
Step 4: Assess whether the situation meets the standard for 
bullying:   
1. Power imbalance  
2. Repeated  
3. Intentional   
 
 


Page 37:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 37 of 44 
 
 
Step 5: Does this allegation involve targeting based on, or 
perceived, membership in a protected class (race, color,  national 
origin, ethnicity, religion, pregnancy, homelessness,  criminal 
record, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability,  age, 
genetics, or active military status?)   If yes, contact the Boston 
Public Schools Office of Equity.  
If no, proceed to step 6.   
Step 6: All allegations of bullying that have been investigated  
must be filed with Succeed Boston by completing the Safe 
Space and Bullying Prevention Investigation Reporting Form 
and documented in the BPS SIS.  
1. Document dates of meetings and calls with 
families/caregivers.  
2. Document all interviews.  
3. Determine if the allegation is bullying, retaliation, simple 
conflict, or Code of Conduct violation.  
4. Document action taken.  
5. Schedule a date to follow up with all parties.  
6. Document incident in SIS under the Conduct Module 
Section 7.1. of the Code of Conduct.  
Please note:   
● Upon receipt of the bullying complaint, the principal/school 
leader or designee must confirm receipt of the complaint to 
the families/caregivers within 24 hours.  


Page 38:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 38 of 44 
 
● The investigation must be completed within 5 school days, 
and the principal/school leader or designee will notify the 
families/caregivers of the target and the aggressor of the 
findings, and of the procedures for responding to it.  
● To ensure the safety of students and compliance with all BPS 
mandates and State laws, repeated allegations from 
families/caregivers and/or no response from the 
principal/school leader will be forwarded to the operational 
leader and the school superintendent for follow-up. 
 
 


Page 39:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 39 of 44 
 
ATTACHMENT 2: 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 12 HOUR PROFESSIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
“Bullying Intervention Specialist Training”  
To build capacity across the district and effectively deal with 
allegations of bullying, each school must have at least two staff 
complete the 12-hour training leading to certification as a 
“Bullying Intervention Specialist.” Once certified, these specialists 
will lead the annual bullying prevention and intervention training 
at their schools and will spearhead the creation and maintenance 
of Caring Communities and Bully Free  Schools. Succeed Boston 
will offer quarterly training sessions throughout the school year. 
Please register on Teach Point.  
In this training, staff will:   
● Learn about state and district regulations, procedures and 
protocols  
● Become familiar with BPS reporting and investigation 
protocols   
● Develop safety plans for targets and action plans for 
aggressors   
● Learn about the different types of bullying   
● Differentiate between bullying and conflict and how to 
respond to each  
● Understand the role school staff play in preventing bullying   
● Learn about culturally and linguistically sustaining practices 


Page 40:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 40 of 44 
 
that lead to spaces that feel safe, welcoming and are 
inclusive   
● Understand how adult bias and micro-aggression impact 
staff’s ability to effectively develop relationships with 
students involved in bullying   
● Develop an awareness of suicide and suicide prevention 
resources 
● Understand the unique way bullying impacts LGBTQ+ and 
ELL students and students with disabilities  
○ Become familiar with FAPE and IDEA as they relate to 
bullying  
● Develop strategies to empower bystanders   
● Learn to differentiate bullying and bias-based speech and 
behavior  
● Learn best practices to address bullying   
● Listening and talking to families with empathy 
● Become familiar with resources to develop and implement 
school-based programs. 
● Develop plans for family workshops  
 
 


Page 41:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 41 of 44 
 
ATTACHMENT 3: 
SAFE SPACE AND BULLYING PREVENTION REPORTING 
FORM - Boston Public Schools 
1. Name of the person reporting this bullying allegation. 
Write "NA" if you want to report anonymously. Note, 
no disciplinary action will be taken solely on the basis 
of an anonymous report. 
2. Phone number of the person reporting this bullying 
allegation. Write "NA" to remain anonymous 
3. Who is reporting this bullying allegation? 
○ I'm a student reporting for myself 
○ I'm a student reporting for another student 
○ I'm a family member/caregiver reporting on 
behalf of my child 
○ I'm a school staff member (admin, educators, 
support staff, etc.) reporting for a student 
4. Name and email of person completing this form (if 
different than above): Write "NA" if not relevant.  
5. Role of person completing this form (if different than 
above) 
○ Bullying Hotline Staff (Succeed Boston staff only) 
○ BPS Help Line Staff 
○ School Staff member 


Page 42:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 42 of 44 
 
○ NA 
6. Have you already reported this incident to the school 
leader? 
○ Yes 
○ No 
7. Name of alleged target: 
8. Student ID# of alleged target: (Please put 0 if 
unknown) 
9. School of alleged target: 
10. Grade of alleged target: 
11. Does the alleged target receive special education 
services?   
○ Yes 
○ No 
○ Unsure 
12. Name and grade of the alleged aggressor(s): (If the 
alleged aggressor is an adult, please indicate) 
13. Do any alleged aggressor(s) attend a different school? 
If yes, please type the name of the school(s) below. (If 
not, please write "NA") 
14. Date, time, and location of incident(s): (If not known, 
please write "NA") 


Page 43:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 43 of 44 
 
 
15. If the incident occurred on a school bus, please list 
the bus number below: (If not on a bus, please write 
"NA") 
16. Describe the incident, including names, details of 
what happened, and specific words used. You may 
send additional evidence (i.e., video, screenshots, 
emails) to saws@bostonpublicschools.org. 
17. Witnesses: List the names of any people who saw the 
incident or may have information about it: (If none, 
please write "NA") 
18. Does this bullying allegation involve bias-based 
speech or behavior? “Bias-based” bullying, including 
cyberbullying or harassment, is when a person is 
bullied because of membership in, or perceived 
membership in, a protected class. Protected classes: 
race, color, age, physical or mental disability, 
pregnancy and pregnancy-related conditions, 
criminal record, homelessness, sex/gender, gender 
identity, religion, national origin, ancestry, sexual 
orientation, genetics, natural or protective hairstyle, 
socioeconomics, and retaliation. Please note: All 
investigations involving bias-based speech or 
behavior will be forwarded to the Office of Equity by 
Succeed Boston. 
○ Yes 
○ No 


Page 44:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 44 of 44 
 
19. Are you concerned for the student's safety? 
○ Yes  
○ No 


