Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SSS-09 
Version 01 
 
 
 
EMPLOYMENT PERMIT APPLICATIONS AND ISSUANCE 
OF WORK PERMITS FOR STUDENTS AGES 14 
THROUGH 17 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version 
 
During the school year, all Boston Public School students 
requiring working papers (employment permits and educational 
certificates) will obtain such from guidance counselors or 
designated staff in their individual schools. 
• Guidance counselors will supervise the issuance of working 
papers, but the secretary designated by the principal or 
head of school will perform the clerical process of issuing 
the papers. 
• Principals and heads of school will determine the time that 
the secretary will perform this function. 
• Occasionally, exceptional circumstances (e.g., heavy 
workload, unscheduled assignments) occur, making it 
impossible for the secretary to perform this task. During 
those times, the guidance counselor will process working 
papers. 
Charter schools are public schools.  Charter school students will 
obtain the employment permit from their school staff. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-09 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
 
Parochial, private, and METCO school students who are residents 
of Boston will obtain the required permits/certificates through 
the Welcome Centers of the Boston Public Schools using the 
online process located on the BPS website 
www.bostonpublicschools.org.  Boston Public School students 
can also obtain their permits/certificates using the online process 
located on the Boston Public Schools website 
www.bostonpublicschools.org when their school is not in session 
(e.g., summer months, school vacations, etc.). 
 
PROCEDURE 
All students under the age of 18 must obtain a work permit 
before starting a new job per Massachusetts General Laws, 
Chapter 149, Sections 86-89. 
The following process must be followed as outlined in the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Employment Permit 
Application for 14 through 17-year-olds. 
1. All students must obtain a Promise of Employment. 
2. The employer must complete the Promise of Employment 
section and sign off on it. 
3. ONLY 14 and 15-year-olds must obtain a signed physician’s 
certificate of health. 
4. All students must have their parent/guardian sign the 
permit application. 
5. The student must also sign the permit application. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-09 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
 
6. When the permit application is completed, it should be 
returned to the school guidance 
7. counselor or the school designee.  
 
The school staff will verify the date of birth and issue a work 
permit. The employment permit application will be kept on file. If 
it is during non-school periods, or the student does not attend a 
Boston Public School, but is a resident of Boston, the student will 
utilize the BPS online Youth Work Permit Request form located 
on the website www.bostonpublicschools.org.  Proof of the 
student's age, such as a birth certificate, passport, immunization 
record, etc., should be provided. An employment permit will then 
be issued. 
Please note that a work permit may not be issued to a parent. 
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 149, Section 89 requires 
that the child appear in person with proper identification. 
According to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
(https://www.mass.gov/service-details/youth-employment-
permit-information): all teens under 18 years of age must 
complete a work permit application and get a work permit 
before starting a new job. Please see the complete summary of 
the Massachusetts laws regulating child labor for further 
information. 
With very limited exceptions, minors under the age of 14 may not 
work. All minors under the age of 18 must complete an 
employment permit application and get their permit before 
starting a new job. You can download Youth Employment Permit 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-09 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
 
Application and Youth Permit Process. You can also access these 
forms in Spanish, Portuguese, Chinese, and Vietnamese. 
FORMS 
1. Employment permit applications can be found and printed 
at https://www.mass.gov/service-details/youth-
employment-permit-information 
2. When school is not in session, please complete this form 
and upload the required documents.  Once completed, a 
BPS Welcome Services team member will contact you 
within two business days regarding the next steps for your 
work permit. Parochial, private and METCO school students 
that are Boston residents may utilize this form during the 
entire year. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Director of Guidance, Office of Schools & 
Accountability 
Department: Guidance Services, Office of Schools & 
Accountability 
Mailing 
Address: 
443 Warren Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8030 
E-mail: 
cchiu@bostonpublicschools.org; Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


