Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-19 
Version 01 
 
BPS STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE FOR 
CLEANING AND DISINFECTING BODY FLUID SPILLS  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
PURPOSE  
This standard operating procedure (SOP) will be implemented to 
ensure BPS custodians safely and properly respond to all 
incidents requiring cleaning and disinfecting of body fluid spills. 
Body fluids – including vomit, diarrhea, and blood – are 
considered potentially infectious. Employees should always treat 
any body fluid response action as potentially infectious and 
always wear proper personal protective equipment when 
cleaning and disinfecting body fluid spills.  
PROCEDURES  
1. Contain the affected area.  
● Discontinue food service operations if a spill occurred 
in food preparation or service areas.  
● Remove students and staff from the affected area or 
classroom.  
● Block off the area of the spill from staff and students 
until cleanup and disinfection are complete. For 
incidents involving vomit, contain all areas within 25 
feet of the spill.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
 
● Send sick students and staff to the school nurse.  
● Excuse (e.g., send home) food service employees with 
symptoms of vomiting or diarrhea from food service 
operations. Refer to the TFER Exclusions and 
Restrictions for Ill or Infected Food Service Employees 
for guidance. Please refer to the food service employee 
reporting agreement.  
● Allow only food service employees and/or custodial 
staff designated to clean and disinfect body fluid spills 
in the affected area.  
2. Put on personal protective equipment (PPE), including:  
● Wear disposable, non-latex gloves. Gloves should be 
vinyl or nitrile (rubber), and non-powdered.  
● Consider double-gloving (wearing two gloves on each 
hand). Replace gloves if they tear or become visibly 
soiled. Keep hands away from the face while wearing 
gloves.  
● Wear a face mask and eye protection (goggles or 
protective glasses).  
3. Remove visible body fluid. 
● Put on new disposable gloves. Consider double 
gloving.  
● Clean the affected area with soap and water, and paper 
towels and/or a disposable mop head. This includes 
surfaces that came into direct contact with body fluids 
and surfaces that may have been contaminated with 
body fluids. Before disinfecting, all surfaces should be 
thoroughly cleaned (i.e., not visibly soiled).  


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
 
● Dispose of the paper towels and/or disposable mop 
head in a plastic garbage bag.  
● Remove gloves and discard in a plastic garbage bag.  
● Wash hands.  
Food contact surfaces:  
● Put on new disposable gloves. Consider double 
gloving.  
● Clean the affected area with soap and water.  
● Rinse thoroughly with plain water.  
● Wipe dry with paper towels.  
● Dispose of paper towels in a plastic garbage bag.  
● Disinfect surfaces.  
● Prepare and apply a solution of ¾ cup concentrated 
bleach + 1 gallon of water.  
● Leave the surface wet for at least 5 minutes.  
● Rinse all surfaces intended for food or mouth contact 
with plain water before use. 
● Wipe down with sanitizing solution concentration for 
food contact surfaces to air dry.  
● Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.  
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
 
Non-absorbent surfaces (i.e., tile, stainless steel): 
● Prepare a disinfecting solution. The disinfecting 
solution shall be an EPA registered hospital grade 
disinfectant.*  
● Wear all PPE, including the face mask and eye 
protection or goggles. Ensure that area is well 
ventilated (mix solution outdoors if necessary).  
● Prepare a disinfecting solution per manufacturer’s 
recommendations immediately before applying it to 
surfaces. It is recommended that this solution be used 
on surfaces that have had any direct contact with body 
fluids.  
● Transfer solution to a spray bottle.  
● Using the spray bottle, generously apply the 
disinfecting solution to affected surfaces, including 
surfaces that came into direct contact with body fluids, 
and surfaces that may have been contaminated with 
body fluids.  
● For incidents involving vomit, disinfect all areas and 
surfaces within 25 feet of the spill.  
● Use in a well-ventilated area.  
● Disinfect high touch areas (e.g., door handles, toilets, 
dispensers, carts, sink faucets, telephones, etc.) 
throughout the food service area, cafeteria dining 
areas, break rooms, and restrooms using disinfecting 
solution and paper towels.  
● Leave the disinfecting solution on affected surfaces for 
a minimum of 5 minutes. If another EPA-approved 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
 
disinfectant is used, follow the manufacturer’s 
instructions.  
● Rinse surfaces with clean water and paper towels 
and/or a disposable mop head.  
● Allow surfaces to air dry.  
● Dispose of the paper towels and/or disposable mop 
head in a plastic garbage bag. 
● Remove gloves and dispose of them in a plastic 
garbage bag.  
● Wash hands.  
* EPA-approved disinfectants may be used instead of 
chlorine bleach solutions. EPA-approved disinfectants 
appropriate for vomit and diarrhea may be found at 
www.osha.gov/sites/default/files/publications/norovirus
-factsheet.pdf. CDC guidelines on norovirus outbreak 
management and disease prevention recommend 
using chlorine bleach solutions on hard surfaces when 
possible. EPA-approved disinfectants appropriate for 
blood may be found www.epa.gov/pesticide-
registration/selected-epa-registered-disinfectants. 
Absorbent surfaces (i.e., carpet, upholstery, cloth):  
● Disinfect with a chemical disinfectant when possible or 
remove and dispose of the affected material. The 
material will be double-bagged and disposed of 
through mainstream waste disposal.  
● Steam clean for a minimum of 5 minutes at 1700F.  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
 
● Launder in a mechanical washing machine on the 
hottest water setting, and dry in a mechanical dryer on 
a high heat setting.  
● Dispose of disinfecting materials in a plastic garbage 
bag, as appropriate.  
● Remove gloves and dispose of them in a plastic 
garbage bag.  
● Wash hands. 
4. Discard potentially contaminated food.  
● Put on new disposable gloves. Consider double 
gloving.  
● Dispose of exposed food and food in containers that 
may have been contaminated by body fluid in a 
garbage bag.  
● For incidents involving vomit, discard all food within 25 
feet of the spill. Food stored in intact, sealed containers 
(i.e., cans) may be salvaged if adequately cleaned and 
disinfected.  
● Remove gloves. Dispose of gloves in a plastic garbage 
bag.  
● Wash hands.  
5. Dispose of PPE and cleaning and disinfecting materials.  
● Put on new disposable gloves. Consider double 
gloving.  
● Securely tie garbage bags containing all of the 
disposed of materials. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
 
● Place garbage bags in a second garbage bag (double 
bag).  
● Clean all non-disposable items (bucket, mop handle, 
etc) with soap and water; then disinfect. Allow these 
items to air dry.  
● Remove PPE, including disposable gloves, and place in 
a second garbage bag.  
● Securely tie the second garbage bag.  
● Discard the bag(s) in the dumpster.  
● Remove soiled clothes, if necessary, and place clothes 
in a separate garbage bag. Securely tie the garbage 
bag. Keep clothes in the tied garbage bag until they 
can be adequately laundered.  
6. Wash hands, arms, and face with soap and water in a 
restroom sink or hand sink. Put on clean clothing, if 
necessary. Apply ethanol-based hand sanitizer to hands.  
7. Wash, rinse, and sanitize potentially contaminated food 
contact surfaces. Include food contact surfaces that were 
disinfected in step 5 of this SOP, and food contact surfaces 
that contained food discarded in step 6 of this SOP.  
8. Restock supplies for cleanup.  
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
 
MONITORING 
Standard daily cleaning of food services areas shall include:  
● Custodial Staff: Sweep and clean the cafeteria floors with a 
neutral cleaner. Cafeteria walls and ceilings shall be cleaned 
on an “as needed” basis. 
● Food Service Staff: Clean and disinfect cafeteria tables with 
a solution of bleach and water.  
NOTE: Cleaning of body fluid spills in food services areas will be 
done by the school’s custodial staff. This will include any bodily 
fluid spill on the cafeteria tables. In this case, only the affected 
table(s) will be cleaned by the custodial staff. All other cafeteria 
tables will be cleaned by the food service staff.  
1. The senior custodian is designated and trained to 
implement this SOP and trained in the use of necessary 
supplies. They will ensure that:  
● Necessary supplies are available at all times.  
● Custodians are:  
○ Educated on illnesses and symptoms that must be 
reported to their building service area manager or 
617-635-9162.  
○ Monitored for signs and symptoms of illness.  
2. The food service manager will ensure that food service 
employees are:  
● Educated on illnesses and symptoms that must be 
reported to managers.  
● Monitored for signs and symptoms of illness.  


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
 
Adapted from USDA document Cleaning and 
Disinfecting Body Fluid Spills (Miami County Public 
Health website). 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner:  
Senior Environmental Supervisor 
Department:  
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 
Campbell Resource Center, 1216 Dorchester 
Ave., Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-8300 
Fax:  
617-635-7855 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Name:  
Equipment Coordinator 
Department:  
Food and Nutritional Services 
Mailing Address: 
Food & Nutrition/Wellness Building, 370 
Columbia Road, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-9296 
Fax:  
617-635-9305 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 
 
Name:  
Sr. Manager, Building Services 
Department:  
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 
Campbell Resource Center, 1216 Dorchester 
Ave., Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-9165 
Fax:  
617-6359306 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


