Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-08 
Version 01 
 
 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS RECYCLING AND ZERO 
WASTE GUIDELINES   
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
BACKGROUND 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts and City of Boston seek to 
minimize waste by reducing, reusing, and recycling. State policies 
and programs such as the Environmentally Preferable 
Purchasing Policy, MassDEP’s Waste Ban Regulations, and 
Executive Order 484 – Leading by Example, and the City of 
Boston Zero Waste Plan are helping state agencies and 
municipalities create healthier buildings and cleaner 
communities while simultaneously reducing costs. Boston Public 
Schools (BPS) has been actively recycling for over a decade. By 
reducing the amount of resources we use and waste we produce, 
we are creating a healthier and more sustainable Boston Public 
Schools. 
BPS is committed to Zero Waste because: 
• Recycling is a core component of the City of Boston's 
commitment to zero waste. 
• Recycling is free for BPS, while trash is an operational cost 
for BPS. School recycling is picked up curbside for free by 
Boston Public Works Department (PWD) as part of the PWD 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
 
Residential Recycling program. School trash is picked up at 
a cost by a contracted waste hauler. Increasing recycling 
while reducing trash decreases BPS operating costs, funds 
which could otherwise be directed to teaching and learning. 
• School zero waste programs mitigate clutter. Clutter 
attracts pests, creates asthma triggers like dust, and takes 
up valuable school space that could otherwise be used for 
teaching, learning, and organized storage. 
• School zero waste programs create hands-on learning and 
engagement opportunities for students and staff. A 
successful zero waste program incorporates education and 
collaboration. 
• The principles of zero waste – redesign/rethink, refuse, 
reduce, repurpose, reuse, recycle – teach us responsibility for 
our schools and our waste. 
 POLICY 
The intent of this BPS Zero Waste Policy is to reduce the amount 
of waste generated by building occupants and reduce the 
amount of non-recyclable waste that is hauled to and disposed of 
in landfills or incineration facilities. Boston Public Schools has 
created this policy which aligns with the City of Boston’s Zero 
Waste Plan. 
Boston Public Schools is responsible for providing recycling 
equipment, education, and cardboard hauling services to all 
buildings operated by BPS, and for ensuring that banned 
materials are separated from trash at the school and other 
building sites, according to MassDEP’s Waste Ban Regulations 
(310 CMR 19.017). The City of Boston Public Works Department is 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
 
responsible for providing curbside hauling services for all BPS 
single-stream recycling. 
School principals/heads of schools, and custodians must ensure 
single stream recycling equipment and signage are displayed to 
collect applicable materials (cardboard, glass, metals, paper, 
plastics) and that other materials are collected and recycled 
and/or disposed of properly, including but not limited to: office 
supplies, books, textiles, yard waste, batteries, ink/toner, 
electronics, and furniture. 
Each school is responsible for identifying a zero waste champion 
who serves as the liaison to BPS Facilities Management and 
whose duties can include educating the school on recycling 
practices, advising a student recycling team, and ensuring the 
school has recycling equipment and signage provided by 
Facilities Management. The zero waste champion and custodial 
staff are encouraged to participate in the school’s Wellness 
Council to ensure that waste management is prioritized and that 
the school’s indoor environment is upheld as a healthy and clean 
place to learn and work. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
Boston Public Schools recycling and zero waste guidance and 
resources can be found at bostongreenschools.org/zero-waste. 
Please use the BPS Zero Waste Guide and BPS recycling signage. 
BPS provides the following recycling services: single stream 
(paper, metal, glass, plastic, paperboard), corrugated cardboard, 
electronic waste, furniture, books, yard waste, construction 
waste, hazardous waste, and universal waste. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
 
Recycling is a collaborative effort and will require support from 
the principal/head of school, custodians, cafeteria staff, teachers, 
students, zero waste champions, and Facilities Management. 
Schools are encouraged to form a student-led Zero Waste Team 
to help manage the single stream recycling program and keep it 
running smoothly throughout the school year. Schools are 
encouraged to host an annual recycling event to educate the 
school community about recycling best practices and announce 
any new recycling or waste management initiatives.   
For recycling to be successful across BPS, each school must: 
• Identify a zero waste champion (teacher, staff, active 
volunteer, or a staff-advised student team) to be a liaison to 
the Facilities Department and a recycling advocate in the 
school. 
• Incorporate recycling tasks into the custodial work plan. 
• Allow time for the zero waste champion and the senior 
custodian to attend any recycling training with Facilities 
Management. 
• Commit to providing ongoing education to the school 
community about recycling best practices to divert as much 
recycling material from the waste stream as possible. 
• If your school needs recycling equipment (boxes, carts, 
barrels, lids, wheels, or signage), complete and submit the 
Zero Waste Equipment Request form to request free 
equipment from Facilities Management. BPS warehouse 
staff will deliver the equipment. 
• Place recycling signage and equipment in appropriate 
places and implement updates to the program per 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
 
instruction from Facilities Management.  
• Equipment must be placed in a 1:1 ratio – one recycling bin 
next to one trash bin. 
• Classrooms and offices must have small recycling bins or 
boxes and trash bins (one of each per room). These small 
bins should be emptied into the larger recycling barrels or 
carts and trash barrels, respectively. 
• Hallways, common areas, food service areas, and 
gymnasiums should have recycling barrels or carts and 
trash barrels. Recycling barrels should be emptied into carts, 
and carts should be rolled outside to the curb before 6am on 
the day of your school recycling pick-up. You can find your 
recycling pick-up day by school address at 
https://www.boston.gov/trash-and-recycling-day-schedule-
and-search. Trash barrels should be emptied into the trash 
dumpster, which is serviced by BPS’s contracted waste 
hauler. 
RECYCLING PROCEDURES AND CONTACTS 
Zero Waste Program and Education 
• Sustainability, Energy, and Environment Program Director, 
Operations-Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org or 
617-635-9576,  or visit bostongreenschools.org/zero-waste if 
you have questions about the BPS Zero Waste Program or 
need educational materials and support. 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
 
Recycling Equipment 
• If your school needs recycling equipment (boxes, carts, 
barrels, lids, wheels, or signage), please complete the Zero 
Waste Equipment Request form to request free equipment 
from Facilities Management. BPS warehouse staff will 
deliver the equipment. Get the form at 
bostongreenschools.org/zero-waste. 
Single-stream Recycling 
• Paper, and most plastic, glass, and metal containers can be 
recycled and picked up curbside by the Public Works 
Department (PWD). Learn more at 
https://www.boston.gov/trash-and-recycling. 
• Question about a particular item? Visit the state’s 
RecycleSmartMA.org and use the Recyclopedia tool. 
• Was your curbside recycling not picked up? Call the City of 
Boston 311 or report through the 311 App. PWD will be 
notified immediately of your missed pick-up. Indicate your 
school, your address, and the issue you had with a missed 
pick-up. 
• Contact Area Manager, Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org or 617-763-1030, if you have 
questions or concerns related to the trash and recycling 
dumpsters. 
Cardboard Recycling 
• All corrugated cardboard must be separated from the 
single-stream recycling, flattened, and stacked into 
hampers for pickup, because BPS receives income for 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
 
cardboard that is put back into the recycling program. 
Cardboard is regularly collected by BPS warehouse staff, 
separately from PWD’s curbside pick-up. 
• Contact Sustainability, Energy, and Environment Program 
Director if your school needs an additional cardboard pickup 
or there were issues with the collection.  
Food Waste 
• At this time, BPS does not compost food waste. Therefore, 
all food waste should be placed into the large trash barrels. 
Food waste should never be put into any type of recycling 
bin, barrel, or cart, nor should it be put into classroom trash 
bins. By putting food waste into the large trash barrels, you 
are helping to prevent pests, spills, and odors in the 
classrooms. 
• BPS will begin implementing food waste collection and 
composting services at some schools in 2022-2023, with 
plans to add services at additional schools each subsequent 
year. 
• Contact your Food & Nutrition Services representative with 
questions about food waste. 
Reuse: Books, School and Art Materials, Sports Equipment, 
Clothing, etc. 
• Consider setting-up a “reuse station” in your school for 
unwanted school supplies that could be used by another 
person in the school. 
• Contact the Office of Academics and Professional Learning, 
bostonpublicschools.org/Domain/2439, for anything related 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
 
to unwanted books or curriculum. 
• Clothing and textiles can be placed in the Bay State Textiles 
or Helpsy boxes, which can be found at multiple school 
locations. Learn more at bostongreenschools.org/zero-
waste, including how your school can add a textiles 
recycling box to your schoolyard. 
Furniture 
• All furniture waste must be reviewed by BPS Facilities 
Management for reuse, redistribution, or proper disposal. 
• Contact Assistant Director, Building Services, Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org for any 
furniture related questions. 
Electronic (anything with a plug or cord) and Toner/Ink 
Cartridge Recycling 
• BPS OIIT manages the collection of old and recyclable IT 
equipment such as printers, monitors, computers, and TVs, 
and ink and toner cartridges. 
• Complete Form 57 and submit to OIIT. OIIT will schedule a 
vendor to pick up the items. Get the form at 
bostongreenschools.org/zero-waste. 
Universal Waste/Hazardous Waste 
• All universal waste (lamps, batteries, mercury-containing 
devices, and pesticides) and hazardous waste must be 
properly labeled and stored in the school’s accumulation 
location. 
• Contact Sr. Environmental Supervisor, Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org or 617-828-


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
 
0695, to schedule a pick-up. 
Metal Recycling 
• Contact Area Manager, Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org or 617-763-1030, to recycle 
metal furniture or scrap items. 
Yard Waste 
• Prior to accumulating yard waste, contact Head 
Groundskeeper, Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org or 617-293-3889 to 
schedule a pick-up. All schoolyard waste must be bagged in 
compostable brown bags or in plastic barrels. All branches 
need to be cut into small pieces and bundled. 
Facility Alterations, Additions, Construction, and Demolition 
• Base building elements permanently or semi-permanently 
attached to the building itself, including all studs, insulation, 
doors, windows, panels, drywall, trim, ceiling panels, carpet, 
flooring material, adhesives, sealants, paints, and coatings 
should be reused or recycled to the greatest extent possible. 
Massachusetts law bans clean gypsum wallboard, concrete, 
asphalt, brick, and wood from disposal in the trash. 
• BPS Facilities Management shall coordinate with 
contractors and Public Facilities Department, when 
applicable, to ensure building repair projects are complying 
with all waste removal laws. 
  
For more information about this circular, contact: 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 
Owner: 
Sustainability, Energy, and Environment 
Program Director 
Department: 
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 
1216 Dorchester Ave, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9576 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 


