Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-11 
Version 01 
 
 
 
GREEN CLEANERS’ POLICY  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
BACKGROUND  
High-performance schools that have superior indoor air quality 
and are healthy and well maintained have been shown to reduce 
absenteeism and improve student performance. Many Boston 
school children suffer from allergies and asthma, which can be 
triggered by poor air quality and chemical, biological, and 
particulate contaminants. Long or short-term exposure to toxic 
chemicals or harmful particles, gasses, or vapors can have serious 
consequences, especially for children, such as asthma, allergies, 
depression, hormonal changes, or even cancer. To ensure the 
best quality learning environment for our students and working 
environment for our staff, it is the responsibility of the Boston 
Public Schools (BPS) to minimize the negative impacts that 
cleaning products have on occupant health and the 
environment.  
POLICY  
The BPS is committed to providing and maintaining high-
performing buildings and grounds in an environmentally friendly 
and sustainable manner. The Green Cleaners Policy is in 
accordance with the City of Boston’s executive order relative to 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-11 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
 
greening city building maintenance and operations and 
executive order relative to climate action. This policy applies to all 
BPS buildings and grounds, including offices, classrooms, 
restrooms, cafeterias, gymnasiums, hallways, pathways, 
kitchenettes, stairwells, etc.  
Under this green cleaning policy, BPS departments, school sites, 
and partner programs taking place in schools must comply with 
the following:  
● Purchase, provide, and use only environmentally friendly 
cleaning products that comply with the Green Seal 
Environmental Standard (GS-37), including but not limited 
to glass, bathroom, carpet, and general-purpose cleaners 
used for industrial and institutional purposes.  
● All other non-approved cleaning products are prohibited 
from being used in BPS buildings and grounds by any staff, 
volunteer, vendor, or partner.  
● Use of disinfectants for cleaning shall be limited to food 
service areas and the clean-up of biological and bodily 
wastes and “high touch areas” (when directed). All 
disinfectants must be premixed, registered by the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, and have a Hazardous 
Materials Identification System (HMIS) rating of 2 or less.  
● Pre-approved or least toxic and asthma friendly 
sanitizer/disinfectants must be used in early learning 
centers in accordance with the National Association of 
Education for Young Children accreditation standards. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-11 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN  
BPS Facilities Management and custodial staff will maintain this 
policy through these implementation steps: 
● Ensure vendors can provide proof that their products meet 
the criteria for Green Seal Environmental Standard for 
Cleaning Products for Industrial and Institutional Use, GS-37. 
The Green Seal program is a North American multi-attribute, 
lifecycle environmental standard and certification.  
● Burnish floor surfaces where applicable to reduce the use of 
potentially irritating cleaning and stripping compounds. Any 
necessary floor stripping and waxing will be performed 
during non-occupied hours.  
● Automatic mixing stations will be installed for custodial use 
that dispense pre-mixed products to ensure the active 
ingredient concentration required by the EPA, limit 
employee contact with chemicals for enhanced safety, and 
minimize waste.  
● Upon request, school custodians will provide teachers and 
other BPS staff with OSHA-compliant pre-labeled spray 
bottles of mixed green cleaning compounds (desktop and 
glass cleaners) that meet the Green Cleaning Policy 
standards.  
● Train and update BPS custodial staff and others who use 
chemicals on the Green Cleaners Policy, including but not 
limited to hazard communications (Right to Know law, 
MSDS, etc.), worker safety and personal protective 
equipment use, safe and proper product and equipment 
use, etc.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-11 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
 
● Custodians will participate on the school’s Wellness Council 
to ensure compliance with this policy as well as other 
Healthy School Environment policies and initiatives 
(recycling, integrated pest management, etc.).  
● To the greatest extent possible, cleaning materials and 
associated packaging will be reused and/or recycled to 
minimize waste.  
● Protocols governing safe handling and storage of cleaning 
chemicals shall be adopted. Quality control checks will be 
used to ensure adoption.  
RESPONSIBLE PARTIES  
This policy is overseen by the BPS Facilities Management 
Department and is updated annually to help ensure cleaning 
practices, products, and technologies specified in this policy 
meet industry standards and best practices.  
BPS staff, contractors, and vendors shall review this policy and 
may request additional information and training as required. 
 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-11 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner:  
Assistant Director, Building Services 
Department:  
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address:  
1216 Dorchester Ave, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-9576 
Fax:  
617-635-9306 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


