Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-04 
Version 01 
 
 
 
CUSTODIAL PAY ADJUSTMENTS – CALL-IN 
PROCEDURE  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
So the Office of Facilities Management (Building Services) may 
properly adjust a custodian's pay in a timely manner, it is 
essential that you follow the payroll procedure outlined below:  
When a senior custodian is absent, you must notify Facilities 
Management (Building Services), by telephone 617-635-9162 or e-
mail (emalone2@bostonpublicschools.org) with: the name of the 
absent senior custodian; the name of the custodian covering; the 
reason for the absence; and all dates of absence, if known. 
When the absent senior custodian returns to work, Facilities 
Management (Building Services) must be notified to ensure that 
the person covering is paid for the correct number of days.  
The custodial pay period begins on Saturday and ends on Friday. 
It is a weekly payroll. If the absentee is to be out on a long-term 
basis, Facilities Management (Building Services) must be notified 
if the current acting senior should be carried forward to the next 
pay period.  
 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-04 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
 
 If a custodian is being docked for all or any part of a day, 
you must notify Beth Malone to ensure the dock is 
properly recorded. You must also notify Facilities with the 
reason for the dock (i.e., late, no show/no call, left early).  
If a custodian is at "0" balance (out of sick, personal, or vacation 
leave), they must be coded. Select Absence Name - Leave 
Without Pay, then select Absence Reason. Additional information 
should be entered in the “comments” panel.  
All docks and acting senior coverage must be reported in a timely 
manner. 
To ensure coverage in a single-person building, prior notice 
should be given to the Office of Facilities Management (Building 
Services) whenever possible. Forty-eight (48) hours’ notice is 
required for personal and compensatory days. Two weeks’ notice 
is required for vacation. 
Calls for acting senior coverage while school is in session will only 
be taken from the head of school/principal, secretary, or 
principal's designee. Custodians should call in any acting senior 
coverage during school vacations and summer months. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-04 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner:  
Assistant Director, Building Services 
Department:  
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address:  
1216 Dorchester Ave, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-9162 
Fax:  
617-635-9306 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


