Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-18 
Version 01 
 
SCIENCE SAFETY IN SCHOOL LABORATORIES AND 
CLASSROOMS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Boston Public Schools (BPS) has developed a Science Safety Plan 
to promote a safer and more effective learning environment for 
students and a healthier workplace for teachers and other 
employees within science classrooms and laboratories in Boston 
Public Schools. The Science Safety Plan is a comprehensive effort 
to address chemical use, storage, and disposal procedures, as 
well as the prevention and/or minimization of and response to 
chemical spills and other accidents.  
The districtwide plan addresses the needs of all BPS science 
classes and is consistent with the requirements of the U.S. 
Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration’s (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1450 Occupational 
Exposures to Hazardous Chemicals in Laboratories for the 
protection of our students and employees, as well as guidance 
materials from the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), 
the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH), and the Boston Fire Department. The Science Safety 
Plan promotes a culture of safety in science and the safe 
operation of all science laboratories for students, faculty, and 
staff.  
To ensure that all students and their teachers work in an 
environment which is safe, it is necessary to formulate standard 
procedures and requirements for all schools and their personnel. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-18 
Page 2 of 8 
 
The Science Safety Plan and this circular will be reviewed 
annually. 
Your performance of these procedures is required. 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF PRINCIPALS/HEADS OF SCHOOLS 
1. 
Ensure that all science classes and laboratories are 
assigned to and conducted in appropriately equipped 
Science Rooms. 
2. 
Provide a list of all science teachers/teachers of science to 
the Science Department by October 1st each year using 
the form provided in Appendix R of the BPS Science 
Safety Plan. 
3. 
Appoint a Science Safety Coordinator (SSC) and ensure 
they:  
a) Attend the mandatory Chemical Safety Training 
session co-hosted by the Science Department and 
Flinn Scientific. 
b) Conduct an annual chemical inventory.  
c) Complete the required safety checks as stated in 
Sections J and O of the BPS Science Safety Plan. 
4. 
Inform the staff and students in writing of the safety 
standards and procedures, including the need to wear 
eye protection devices. 
5. 
Ensure that workable fire extinguishers, blankets, safety 
showers, and eyewash equipment are readily available 
and that appropriate personnel receive training in the use 
of each. 
6. 
Ensure staff review and implement the BPS Science 
Safety Plan. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-18 
Page 3 of 8 
 
7. 
Ensure that staff has instructed all students in safety 
standards and procedures, including the BPS Science 
Safety Plan and the School Safety Plan. 
8. 
Post building evacuation procedures in classrooms, 
laboratories, and chemical storage rooms. 
9. 
Conduct quarterly fire drills. 
10. 
Maintain adequate lighting and proper ventilation in 
laboratories and classrooms, and report problems to 
Facilities Management immediately. 
11. 
Be sure that teacher evaluations reflect the 
implementation of safety standards and procedures. 
12. 
Ensure that a "Right to Know" workplace notice is posted 
in the school's Science Rooms pursuant to Mass. Gen. 
Laws c. 111F. 
13. 
Ensure a copy of all safety data sheets (SDSs) is 
maintained in the main office and chemical storage areas. 
14. 
Ensure that all instructors working with toxic or 
hazardous substances receive training as specified in 
Chapter 111F of the Massachusetts General Laws through 
the Science Department. 
15. 
Notify the Science Department of any accident or injury in 
a Science Area. 
16. 
Submit the Annual Hazardous Material Permit 
Application to Boston Fire Department and post the 
current permit in the main office. 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-18 
Page 4 of 8 
 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF TEACHERS 
1. 
Review and implement the Science Safety Plan, including 
SOPs for general laboratories, chemical use and storage, 
chemistry laboratories, biology laboratories, physics 
laboratories, and waste management. 
2. 
Attend annual safety training(s) including science safety 
and first aid. 
3. 
Practice safety procedures and serve as the model for 
good safety conduct for students. 
4. 
Establish a Student Safety Contract with each student 
prior to any laboratory activities. 
5. 
Require the use of appropriate personal protective 
equipment. 
6. 
Avoid accidents by insisting that students dress properly 
for the laboratory. 
7. 
Supervise students at all times. Under no circumstances 
shall a teacher leave students unsupervised in a 
laboratory or chemical storage room. If an instructor must 
leave the laboratory in an emergency, they must: 
a) Arrange for a qualified teacher as a replacement, OR 
b) Relocate students to a properly supervised area, 
c) Lock the laboratory, and 
d) Shut off equipment. 
8. 
Inspect fire extinguishers monthly and safety showers 
and eyewash stations weekly (SSC or science teacher in 
charge). 
9. 
Maintain first aid kit in an easily accessible area (SSC or 
science teacher in charge). 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-18 
Page 5 of 8 
 
10. 
Maintain a chemical inventory using the online 
ChemVentory system, update at least annually, and 
submit an electronic copy to the Science Department and 
Facilities Management by October 1st each year (SSC or 
science teacher in charge). 
11. 
Ensure SDSs for all chemicals are accessible and copies 
are kept in the chemical storage room or school’s Science 
Department and in the administrative main office (SSC or 
science teacher in charge). 
12. 
Store all chemicals in their compatible chemical families. 
13. 
Keep all chemical storage rooms or cabinets locked at all 
times when not in use. 
14. 
Label all chemical storage rooms/cabinets and laboratory 
doors with the appropriate NFPA Diamond (SSC or 
science teacher in charge). 
15. 
Ensure all chemical and waste containers are labeled 
appropriately and stored safely until they can be 
removed. Contact Facilities Management for removal. 
16. 
Implement the appropriate emergency procedure, waste 
disposal, spill cleanup, evacuation routes, and fire 
emergency notification when needed. 
17. 
Consult with the Science and/or Facilities Management 
Department staff as appropriate regarding the use of 
Class 1A flammables, compressed gasses, donated 
chemicals, and the implementation of any laboratory 
experiment that may be more hazardous than those 
contained in the district-identified curriculum. 
18. 
Report all accidents and injuries to the principal/head of 
school and direct supervisor. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-18 
Page 6 of 8 
 
19. 
Report lighting, ventilation, safety equipment, and 
laboratory disrepair to principal/head ofschool, direct 
supervisor, and Facilities Management. 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF STUDENTS 
1. 
Practice good chemical hygiene habits. 
2. 
Maintain an awareness of health and safety hazards and 
report unsafe practices and conditions to the teacher. 
3. 
Report all accidents and injuries to the teacher 
immediately.  
4. 
Know and follow emergency procedures.  
5. 
Notify the teacher of any sensitivity or allergy to 
chemicals. 
6. 
Wear appropriate apparel and personal protective 
equipment, including goggles, during laboratory 
activities.  
7. 
Conduct all activities according to teacher instructions to 
ensure the Science Safety Plan is followed.  
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 
Facilities Management and BPS district Science Department will 
provide all schools with technical assistance in improving and 
maintaining safety procedures. Facilities Management and Safety 
personnel are available to coordinate fire prevention activities 
and building and safety equipment inspections. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-18 
Page 7 of 8 
 
Contact:   
• Chief Environmental Technician, Facilities Management 
 
617-635-8300 
• Assistant Superintendent, Office of Teaching and Learning 
617-635-8079 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Sr. Environmental Supervisor 
Department: 
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 
1216 Dorchester Ave., Boston, MA 02108 
Phone: 
617-635-8300 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
OR 
Owner: 
Science, Technology, and Engineering 
Department 
Department: 
Office of Teaching and Learning 
Mailing Address: 
Campbell Resource Center, 1216 Dorchester 
Ave., Boston, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-8750 
Email: 
bpssciencematerials@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-18 
Page 8 of 8 
 
Additional contacts in the Office of Teaching and Learning: 
Chief of Teaching and 
Learning 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
Executive Director of STEM OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
Program Director, High 
School Science 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


