Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
EQT-10 
Version 01 
 
 
 
OPPORTUNITY AND ACHIEVEMENT GAPS (OAG) 
POLICY IMPLEMENTATION  
(For the 2016 Policy of the Boston Public Schools to Eliminate 
Opportunity & Achievement Gaps for students of color, 
multilingual learners, students with disabilities and students of 
low socio-economic status)  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
CIRCULAR CONTENTS 
I. 
Opportunity & Achievement Gaps (OAG) Policy Goals 
II. 
OAG Policy Oversight and Implementation 
III. 
OAG Policy SMARTIE Goals / Aligned with Strategic Plan 
Implementation Goals  
a. Superintendent Goals  
b. Central Office Department & Division Goals  
c. School-based Goals  
d. Cross Functional Team Goals  
IV. 
Transparency & Public Accountability  
The Boston Public Schools is committed to ensuring that every 
child in every classroom has unfettered access to all the 
opportunities needed to be successful academically and social 
emotionally. In order to meet this mission, it’s important that 
every district employee reads, understands, embodies, and 
implements the 2016 Opportunity & Achievement Gaps Policy.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
 
 
I. 
OAG POLICY GOALS  
The OAG Policy aspires to achieve the following goals: 
• Goal 1: Districtwide Implementation and Oversight 
• Goal 2: Districtwide Focus on Cultural Proficiency as 
Central to the Work of the Boston Public Schools 
o Objective 2.1: Develop a clear, shared vision for cultural 
proficiency with Cultural Proficiency Standards, and 
promote culturally and linguistically sustaining and 
affirming practices districtwide.  
o Objective 2.2: Continue and expand efforts aimed at 
increasing dialogue and transparency around issues of 
racism and inclusion and create a system for reporting 
allegations of racial bias and discriminatory practices 
through the Office of Equity. 
• Goal 3: Diversity and Cultural Proficiency in Leadership 
and Human Capital 
o Objective 3.1: Increase the diversity of teachers, 
administrators, and staff in schools and the Central 
Office.  
o Objective 3.2: Provide long-term, ongoing professional 
development and coaching for staff at all levels of the 
district on eliminating gaps, transforming and 
improving instructional practices and beliefs, and 
building a culture of high expectations and 
achievement for all students. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
 
• Goal 4: Holistic, Culturally Affirming Approach to School 
and Teacher Quality 
o Objective 4.1: Provide a culturally proficient and highly 
effective teacher in every classroom and give cultural 
proficiency standards greater weight on the Teacher 
Evaluation Rubric.  
o Objective 4.2: Demonstrate how curricula are vetted 
for bias and cultural proficiency and ensure that the 
curriculum and instructional strategies used in all 
subjects at all levels are rigorous, highly engaging, 
culturally affirming, and foster student identity and 
voice. 
o Objective 4.3: Demonstrate how Social and Emotional 
Learning (SEL) is used to develop student identity and 
an appreciation of race, ethnicity, culture, language, 
gender, and social class among students and teachers; 
and foster comfort in discussing these issues explicitly 
in school.  
o Objective 4.4: Demonstrate how assessments are used 
to drive deeper learning, eliminate redundant testing, 
and disaggregate data by ethnicity in addition to race 
and gender to identify and address opportunity and 
achievement gaps.  
o Objective 4.5: Demonstrate how appropriate 
identification, placement, and support services are 
provided for students with disabilities and English 
Language Learners.  
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
 
• Goal 5: Dismantling Structural Barriers and Providing 
Greater Access to Opportunities 
o Objective 5.1: Demonstrate how equity is addressed 
within the district’s operations. 
o Objective 5.2: Demonstrate equity in student 
assignment, enrollment, and school closings. 
o Objective 5.3: Demonstrate equity, quality, and impact 
in funding and resources.  
o Objective 5.4: Demonstrate how opportunities such as 
access to rigorous curriculum, early childhood 
education, and extended learning time are being 
expanded to all students of color and other 
marginalized groups.  
o Objective 5.5: Demonstrate how, in collaboration with 
the City of Boston, BPS fosters strong parent 
community-school ties to mitigate the effects of 
concentrated poverty and institutional racism citywide 
as a strategy to eliminate gaps.  
• Goal 6: Students, Family, and Community as Authentic 
Partners 
o Objective 6.1: Demonstrate how students are engaged 
as partners in eliminating opportunity and 
achievement gaps, while promoting student 
engagement and agency in active learning.  
o Objective 6.2: Demonstrate how parents are engaged 
as partners in eliminating opportunity and 
achievement gaps.  
o Objective 6.3: Demonstrate how community partners 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
 
are engaged with the District to eliminate opportunity 
and achievement gaps. 
II. 
OAG POLICY OVERSIGHT AND IMPLEMENTATION 
The Office of Opportunity Gaps of the Division of Equity, Strategy 
and Opportunity Gaps (ESOG) has the authority to oversee the 
implementation of the OAG policy as designated by the 
superintendent of schools.  
• To ensure that all “departments and schools 
[demonstrate] equity in all facets of district operations,” 
each department and school is expected to develop 
annual goals that advance the goals of the OAG policy 
under their purview.  
• For central office departments, each OAG policy goal 
should be developed in consultation with a designated 
member of the Office of Opportunity Gaps before the 
beginning of each school year.  
• For schools, school leaders, in consultation with their 
school superintendent, should develop goals advancing 
the OAG policy as a part of their annual Quality School 
Plan (QSP). The school superintendents should have the 
goals reviewed by the Office of Opportunity Gaps for 
consultation and feedback for finalization by November 1 
of each year.  
• The Office of Opportunity Gaps and the Office of Strategy 
& Innovation will work in partnership to ensure alignment 
of strategy plan implementation goals and OAG policy 
implementation goals across central office departments. 
Each department's OAG goal(s) shall also serve as one or 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
 
more of its strategic plan implementation goals.   
 
III. 
OAG POLICY SMARTIE GOALS / ALIGNED WITH STRATEGIC 
PLAN IMPLEMENTATION GOALS 
“Implementation and Evaluation: Within six months of the 
Boston School Committee (BSC) adoption of this policy, Boston 
Public Schools (BPS) will develop and present to BSC an 
interdepartmental implementation plan for this policy. The 
Implementation Plan must include SMART Goals which are 
Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic, and Time-Bound. 
Each October, beginning in 2017, BPS will submit an annual 
report on the Plan’s progress which will include SMART Goals for 
the subsequent calendar year. BPS will develop an Opportunity 
and Achievement Gaps (OAG) Dashboard, publicly available on 
the BPS website, which monitors and assesses the District’s 
progress towards meeting the goal of eliminating the 
opportunity and achievement gaps facing students of color and 
other marginalized groups.” 
• Superintendent Goals: At the beginning of each school 
year, the superintendent’s goals, objectives, and 
implementation of activities will be aligned with the goals 
and objectives of the Opportunity and Achievement Gap 
Policy.   
• Central Office Goals:  At the beginning of each fiscal year, 
each division-office must develop an Opportunity and 
Achievement Gap Goal and Strategy(s) that elevates 
student disproportionality within their workstreams. 
Goals are reviewed quarterly to determine progress on 
implementation for student achievement.  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
 
• School-Based Goals: At the beginning of each school year, 
School Leaders and their teams must develop an 
Opportunity and Achievement Gap Goals and 
Strategy(ies) within their Quality School Plans that elevate 
student disproportionalities within teaching, learning, 
operational, and social emotional supports. Quality School 
Plans are reviewed every 90 days to determine progress 
on implementation for student achievement. 
IV. 
TRANSPARENCY & PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY  
“The Boston School Committee must ensure that eliminating the 
opportunity and achievement gaps facing students of color, 
English Language Learners, students with disabilities, and 
students of low socio-economic status is a primary and urgent 
priority that will not change with new leadership, fluctuating 
budgets, and shifting priorities. All District policies, budgets, 
strategic plans, and school improvement plans shall advance 
the goal of eliminating the opportunity and achievement gaps 
facing students of color, English Language Learners, students 
with disabilities, and students of low socio-economic status.”  
RESPONSIBILITY OF DISTRICT LEADERSHIP 
Equity Impact Statements:  
All reports, policy recommendations, and budgets presented to 
the Boston School Committee shall be accompanied by an Equity 
Impact Statement that explicitly shows a comparison of the gaps 
for students of color, multilingual learners, students with 
disabilities, and students of low socio-economic status, 
disaggregated by ethnicity, to the extent possible. This 
Achievement Gap Impact Statement will give an explicit 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
 
examination of how the report, policy recommendation, and/or 
budget will help or hinder eliminating gaps and increase or 
decrease opportunities for students of color, Multilingual learners, 
students with disabilities, and students of low socio-economic 
status.  
All new policies will be automatically reviewed in one year to 
present disaggregated ethnic and program data to show that the 
policy is having its intended impact, along with lessons learned 
and  future recommendations. 
Other Provisions / Excerpts From the OAG Policy: 
• Leadership and Oversight: The superintendent and their 
designee (e.g., the assistant superintendent for the 
Opportunity and Achievement Gap) will have the 
responsibility, authority, and accountability to lead, 
facilitate, and monitor the implementation of this policy 
so that it is fully embedded in the operations and 
practices of the district.   
• Resource Allocation: BPS shall base resource allocation 
decisions on the OAG Implementation Plan, and target 
resources to meet the specific gap closing goals of the 
plan, including fully funding the Office of the Opportunity 
and Achievement Gap and the Office of Equity. As part of 
the annual report, BPS will indicate the resources it has 
allocated to implement the OAG plan.  
• Monitoring: The Opportunity and Achievement Gaps Task 
Force shall continue as a monitoring body, meeting no 
less than quarterly, providing guidance and input, and 
working in partnership with the Boston School 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
 
Committee, and BPS to help ensure that the 
Implementation Plan is developed, and the policy is being 
implemented with consistency and fidelity across the 
district. The task force will give an annual State of the 
Opportunity and Achievement Gaps Report to the Boston 
School Committee and shall make recommendations as 
needed to influence the budget process and planning for 
each subsequent school year. 
• Performance Reviews: Beginning in SY22-23, annual 
performance reviews for the superintendent and all BPS 
staff shall include goals related to cultural proficiency and 
eliminating opportunity and achievement gaps.  
 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Assistant Superintendent, Office of 
Opportunity Gaps 
Department: 
Office of Opportunity Gaps  
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
OR 
Owner: 
Assistant Superintendent, Office of 
Opportunity Gaps 
Department: 
Equity Strategy, Opportunity Gaps  
Mailing Address: Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


