Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
EQT-05 
Version 01 
 
 
 
BIAS-BASED CONDUCT TOWARD EMPLOYEES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
PURPOSE 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to maintaining a 
workplace free of bias-based conduct and discrimination where 
all employees can flourish.  
The Boston Public Schools utilizes the procedures outlined in this 
circular to investigate and resolve reports of alleged violations of 
the district’s nondiscrimination policy (see EQT-01). These 
procedures are designed to facilitate a prompt and effective 
internal review and resolution of allegations of bias-based 
conduct, discrimination or harassment based on race, color, age, 
criminal record (inquiries only), disability, sex/gender, gender 
identity, religion, national origin, ancestry, retaliation, sexual 
orientation, genetics, natural or protective hairstyle, or military 
status. The intent of these procedures is to ensure that, to the 
greatest extent possible, such reports are addressed in a 
constructive manner. 
COVERAGE 
The procedures pertain solely to reports explicitly alleging bias-
based conduct, discrimination, or harassment based on race, 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-05 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 
 
color, age, criminal records (inquiries only), disability, 
pregnancy/pregnancy related conditions, sex/gender, gender 
identity, religion, national origin, ancestry, retaliation, sexual 
orientation, genetics, natural or protective hairstyle, or military 
status. Behavior that occurs in a location other than a Boston 
Public Schools building or outside of BPS school or work hours, 
including when an employee is working remotely, may still 
constitute bias-based misconduct and a violation of this policy if 
that behavior has the effect of disrupting an employee’s ability to 
do their job. 
Employees sometimes experience “microaggressions”: verbal or 
nonverbal communication that is rooted in implicit bias, but does 
not rise to the level of a violation of this circular. Examples 
include: 
• Mistaking one staff member for another because they share 
the same racial identity 
• Complimenting a staff member for having a skill that is 
counter to a stereotype regarding their gender or ethnicity 
• Assuming a staff member observes a particular religious 
holiday or has a particular sexual orientation 
• Asking a staff member about their disability without their 
consent. 
When microaggressions are reported to the Office of Equity, the 
Office will partner with the reporter and/or other appropriate 
staff to determine an effective intervention, such as coaching, 
mediation, restorative justice, or an individual or school- or 
department-wide training.  


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-05 
Page 3 of 8 
 
 
 
GENERAL POLICIES 
1. Employees in supervisory or managerial roles have an 
obligation to report possible violations of this circular. 
2. Retaliation against any employee for reporting or 
participating in any way in the reporting or investigative 
procedures is strictly prohibited. 
3. Whenever possible, investigatory meetings will be 
scheduled during a mutually convenient time that does not 
conflict with regularly scheduled school programs. 
4. Reporting a possible violation will not be construed as 
reflecting unfavorably on an employee’s or applicant’s good 
standing, performance, loyalty, or desirability to the Boston 
Public Schools. 
5. Information regarding the allegations, including the parties 
involved in the report and the investigation, will be kept 
confidential to the extent practicable. 
6. In determining whether the alleged conduct constitutes a 
violation of the BPS nondiscrimination policy, the 
Superintendent or their designee will consider the 
surrounding circumstances, the nature of the behavior, the 
relationships between the parties, and the context in which 
the incidents occurred. A determination whether a 
particular action or incident constitutes a violation of the 
policy will be based on all the facts. 
PROCEDURES 
1. An employee or applicant who believes they may have 
experienced, witnessed, or become aware of possible bias-
based conduct must contact the Office of Equity by phone, 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-05 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 
 
email, or fax. Employees are strongly encouraged to contact 
the Office of Equity as soon after the incident as possible, as 
reports are more easily addressed the sooner they are 
reported. A member of the Office of Equity staff will ask the 
reporter for information regarding the incident(s) and may 
request that the reporter submit a written statement. The 
Office of Equity will ensure that assistance is provided in 
preparing such a written statement, if needed. The Office of 
Equity accepts all reports of possible bias-based conduct 
but, depending on the circumstances, may decline to 
investigate allegations regarding incidents that occurred 
more than 300 calendar days prior to receipt of the report. 
2. Employees in a supervisory capacity are required to report 
possible bias-based conduct toward or involving employees, 
vendors, or contractors to the Office of Equity as soon as 
practicable, generally within the same school day. 
3. After a report is received, the Office of Equity will notify the 
appropriate department identified in the report and/or the 
individual against whom the report has been filed.  
4. The Office of Equity will make a fair, impartial, thorough, and 
prompt investigation of the reported incident(s). The 
investigation may include interviews with individuals who 
have pertinent information and a review of any documents 
or other information relevant to the investigation. BPS 
employees are obligated to cooperate with any Equity 
investigation, including promptly providing any requested 
information or documents. 
5. The individual who reported alleged bias-based conduct 
and any subjects of the investigation will be informed when 
the investigation is complete, and informed whether 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-05 
Page 5 of 8 
 
 
 
prohibited conduct was found. Depending on the facts 
gathered, the Office of Equity may resolve the concerns by 
applying approaches such as alternative dispute resolution, 
restorative justice, training, or coaching. In other instances, 
the results of the investigation may also be documented as 
written findings. Mediation will not be used in cases 
involving sexual assault. 
6. If the Office of Equity finds that there is a preponderance of 
evidence to show that a violation of the district’s 
nondiscrimination policy occurred, the office will determine 
ways to address the matter and prevent recurrences. 
7. The Office of Equity will maintain records of all reports of 
bias-based conduct made to the Office of Equity, noting the 
school or department in which the alleged incident(s) 
occurred, the person accused, and the results of the 
investigation. The Office of Equity may review its records to 
identify any patterns and take appropriate action as 
necessary.  
The Office of Equity will: 
1. Take seriously all concerns regarding possible bias-based 
conduct. 
2. Take necessary steps to end any conduct determined to be 
in violation of the district’s nondiscrimination policy, prevent 
this conduct from recurring in the future, and remedy its 
effects, where appropriate.  
3. Refer individuals found to have violated the district’s 
nondiscrimination policy for disciplinary action when 
appropriate.  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-05 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 
 
For employees, such action may include written warning, 
suspension, termination, or another action deemed 
appropriate under the circumstances. (For more information 
about Employee Discipline Procedures, please see 
Superintendent Circular HRS-PP10.) 
For students, such action may include suspension, 
expulsion, or another action deemed appropriate under the 
circumstances. (For more information on student discipline, 
please see the Code of Discipline for Students and Students 
with Disabilities – Superintendent Circulars SUP-05 and SPE-
15.)  
4. Require students, employees, or other third parties found to 
violate the district’s nondiscrimination policy to attend 
discrimination prevention training, as appropriate. 
STATE AND FEDERAL REMEDIES 
In addition to the above, if you believe you have been subjected 
to unlawful discrimination, you may file a formal complaint with 
either of the government agencies set forth below. Reporting a 
concern to the Office of Equity does not prohibit you from filing a 
complaint with these agencies. Each of the agencies has a time 
period of 300 days for filing a claim. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-05 
Page 7 of 8 
 
 
 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) 
John F. Kennedy Federal Building 
475 Government Center 
Boston, MA 02203 
(800) 660-4000 
 
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (MCAD) 
Office Location: 
Address: 
Boston 
One Ashburton Place, Room 601 
Boston, MA 02108 
(617) 994-6000 
Springfield 
436 Dwight Street, Suite 220 
Springfield, MA 01103 
(413) 739-2145 
New Bedford 
 
800 Purchase Street, Room 501 
New Bedford, MA 02740  
(508) 990-2390 
Worcester 
484 Main Street, Room 320 
Worcester, MA 01608 
(508) 453-9630 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-05 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Training and School Support 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., 5th floor, Roxbury, MA 
02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
Email: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


