Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
EQT-03 
Version 01 
 
 
 
SEXUAL MISCONDUCT TOWARD STUDENTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
INTRODUCTION 
The Boston Public Schools (BPS) is committed to ensuring that 
students learn in an environment free of sexual misconduct. 
Sexual misconduct committed against a BPS student will not be 
tolerated. In addition, acts of retaliation against an individual who 
reports an allegation of sexual misconduct or cooperates with a 
related investigation are unacceptable and will not be tolerated. 
Students participating in BPS academic, educational, 
extracurricular, athletic, and school programs or activities are 
protected from sexual misconduct by other students, parents, 
BPS employees, and third parties (e.g., visitors). In addition, BPS 
students may be protected from sexual misconduct that occurs 
outside the context of a school’s education program, activity, or 
school property, if the behavior was in connection with a school 
program or activity which includes locations, events, or 
circumstances over which the district exercised substantial 
control over both the person accused of the conduct and the 
context in which the sexual misconduct occurred.   
The Boston Public Schools treats reports of sexual misconduct 
with the utmost seriousness. We will address any sexually 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 2 of 14 
 
 
 
inappropriate communication or behavior directed toward 
students, regardless of whether that conduct is unlawful. This 
policy is neither designed nor intended to limit the district’s 
authority to discipline or take remedial action for conduct that 
the Boston Public Schools deems unacceptable. 
DEFINITION OF SEXUAL MISCONDUCT 
For the purposes of this policy, sexual misconduct constitutes 
sexually inappropriate comments and/or behaviors of any kind. 
Below are examples of sexual misconduct: 
Sexual Violence 
Sexual violence is broadly defined as any sexual activity that is 
forced, coerced, or unwanted. It also includes any sexual act 
against another person who is incapable of giving consent, either 
because of their temporary or permanent mental or physical 
incapacity, or because they are a minor.  
Consent is defined as clear, active agreement and permission to 
engage in any form of verbal or nonverbal sexual communication 
or activity with another person. The initiator of the sexual contact 
is responsible for obtaining consent before engaging in any 
sexual contact. Consent can be withdrawn by either party at any 
point. Consent must be voluntary and may not be valid if a 
person is being subjected to an emotional, psychological, 
physical, reputational, or financial threat, intimidation, or 
coercion. Consent to engage in one sexual activity, or past 
agreement to engage in a particular sexual activity, cannot be 
presumed to constitute consent to engage in a different sexual 
activity or to engage again in a sexual activity. Consent cannot be 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 3 of 14 
 
 
 
validly given by a person who is incapacitated or under the age of 
sixteen.  
Sexual violence may include criminal acts, such as indecent 
assault and battery, rape, abuse, or assault with intent to rape. 
Any acts that may be criminal will be referred to law 
enforcement. 
Examples of sexual violence may include, but are not limited to, 
the following: 
• Unwelcome sexual touching  
• Non-consensual sexual contact that occurs during school or 
non-school hours, on or off school grounds, including dating 
violence 
• Recruiting, transporting, obtaining, or providing a student of 
any gender for the purpose of sex. 
Other Forms Of Sexual Misconduct 
Sexual misconduct includes unwelcome conduct of a sexual 
nature that denies or limits, on the basis of sex, a student's ability 
to participate in or to receive benefits, services, or opportunities 
in the school's program or activities. 
Examples of behavior that may constitute sexual misconduct 
depending upon the totality of the circumstances, the ages of 
the student or other individuals involved, and the severity and 
pervasiveness of the conduct, include but are not limited to: 
• Sexual advances, whether or not they involve touching 
• Requests for sexual favors 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 4 of 14 
 
 
 
• Making an educational decision or benefit contingent upon 
a student’s submission to unwelcome sexual conduct 
• Offensive public sexual display of affection, including 
groping, fondling, gestures, or inappropriate touching of 
oneself or others 
• Consensual groping, fondling, sexual touching, or sex on 
school property or at any school-sponsored activity  
• Sexual jokes or references 
• Comments regarding a student’s body or a student’s sexual 
activity or orientation 
• Offensive name calling or profanity that is sexually 
suggestive, sexually degrading, or based on sexual 
stereotypes or sexual orientation 
• Different treatment because of pregnancy status 
• Displaying or distributing sexually explicit drawings, 
pictures, or other materials in any form (such as sexting) 
• Trafficking of youth for sexual purposes, such as recruiting, 
transporting, or otherwise exploiting a minor in exchange 
for money, shelter, or food  
• Sexual advances or contact, whether or not they are 
consensual, between a student and employee, contractor, or 
community partner  
• Sexual activity between students in a school, or any building 
where BPS business is conducted 
• Other verbal, nonverbal, or physical conduct of a sexual 
nature. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 5 of 14 
 
 
 
Any student, regardless of gender identity or sexual orientation, 
can be a target of sexual misconduct, and the alleged targets and 
the subject of the concern can be of the same or different 
genders. 
Employees of the Boston Public Schools who become aware of 
any possible sexual misconduct toward or involving students 
must report the incident or concern to their school leader, 
supervisor, and/or the Office of Equity as soon as practicable, 
generally within the same school day. The same reporting 
requirement applies to partners or contractors providing services 
to students in or under the auspices of the Boston Public Schools. 
The above list of examples is not exhaustive. If you are unsure 
whether a student may have been a target of sexual misconduct 
or if you have knowledge of a possible incident of sexual 
misconduct involving a student, immediately contact your school 
principal/head of school, supervisor, or the Office of Equity at 617-
635-9650 or bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org. 
REPORTING AND INVESTIGATING SEXUAL MISCONDUCT  
A student, parent, or other third party who believes that a 
student has been subjected to inappropriate sexual conduct may 
report the incident to the principal/head of school or the Office of 
Equity. 
The Boston Public Schools will promptly investigate allegations 
of sexual misconduct even when the incident is being 
investigated by law enforcement or another entity. Our 
obligation is to determine if there has been a violation of a BPS 
circular and/or the BPS Code of Conduct. The investigation will 
be conducted in a manner maintaining confidentiality to the 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 6 of 14 
 
 
 
extent practicable under the circumstances. Incidents that a BPS 
employee becomes aware of directly or indirectly, such as from a 
note or an overheard conversation, will also be investigated.  
Interim measures for the safety of the students involved must be 
taken upon receipt of the report to ensure equal access to 
educational programs and activities. 
If the investigation results in a finding of a violation of this policy, 
Boston Public Schools will take steps to end the misconduct, 
prevent any further misconduct, remedy its effects where 
appropriate, and take disciplinary action, as deemed appropriate 
under the circumstances.  
REPORTING PROCEDURES  
(see Appendix A checklist) 
These instructions assume that the Office of Equity has already 
been informed of an incident as required, and that a school 
administrator has been instructed to follow this protocol. 
After receiving a report of sexual misconduct, the building 
administrator must immediately (within the same school day, 
with rare exceptions): 
1. Ensure that a student who discloses sexual misconduct is 
not interviewed by any other BPS employee subsequent to 
the initial disclosure, unless otherwise specifically directed 
by law enforcement, the state Department of Children and 
Families (DCF), or the Office of Equity. To minimize the 
alleged target’s emotional distress and to preserve the 
integrity and reliability of any investigation, the initial 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 7 of 14 
 
 
 
disclosure conversation should be limited to the essential 
facts. The BPS staff member who first receives the report 
must document the conversation as thoroughly as possible. 
2. Assess the need for emergency interim safety measures to 
prevent any additional incidents and ensure that the target 
is able to fully engage in the school’s programs and 
activities. Implement any plan as appropriate.  
3. Report the incident to your school’s Safety Specialist or 
Safety Services at 617-635-8000 if the allegation involves 
sexual assault or violence, such as physical contact or 
threats. Call Safety Services even if you are not sure if the 
alleged incident constitutes sexual violence. Inform the 
school nurse if medical care is needed.  
If Safety Services are not available, call 911.  
Depending on the nature of the allegations, the Office of 
Safety Services may work directly with the Boston Police 
Department School Unit. Thereafter, the Boston Police 
Crimes Against Children Unit may conduct the 
investigation. A team investigation may include other 
agency involvement. By law, the police cannot provide the 
Boston Public Schools with a written report regarding an 
incident of sexual violence. 
4. Contact the Department of Children and Families (DCF) to 
file a 51A report if the allegation warrants. As mandated 
reporters, employees of the Boston Public Schools are 
required to report situations when there is reasonable cause 
to believe a student is suffering from physical or emotional 
injury that causes harm or a substantial risk of harm to the 
student’s health or welfare.  


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 8 of 14 
 
 
 
Questions related to school employees’ obligation to file a 
51A report with DCF should be directed to the Office of Legal 
Advisor. Please also refer to Superintendent’s Circular SSS-17 
on Child Abuse and Neglect.  
If the alleged subject is over 18 years old, under 7 years old, 
or has a disability that might manifest as inappropriate 
sexual conduct, please call the Office of Equity prior to filing 
a 51A. 
5. Always alert the school’s operational leader. If you wish, 
and/or upon request of the Office of Equity, also alert the 
school’s elementary or secondary school superintendent. 
Depending on the severity and complexity of the 
allegations, the school superintendent and/or operational 
leader will then partner with the designated school 
administrator and/or the Office of Equity to complete the 
investigation. 
6. Notify the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of the reporter or 
alleged victim, if a minor, unless the parent/legal guardian is 
the subject of the concern and/or such notification will 
create a substantial risk to the student’s health, safety, or 
welfare.  
7. If the subject of the concern is a minor, the building 
administrator (or other Office of Equity Designee) should 
notify the subject’s parent(s) or legal guardian(s). For 
reasons of confidentiality, do not inform the subject’s family 
of the alleged target’s identity or gender.  
8. Submit Section 1 of the Equity Student Incident & 
Investigation Form within the same school day, if possible, 
but always within 48 hours of the incident. This document 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 9 of 14 
 
 
 
should be treated as confidential and sent to the Office of 
Equity only. Only share this document or other related 
documents as directed by the Office of Equity, Office of 
Legal Advisor, or law enforcement authorities. The form can 
be submitted digitally via this link. 
9. Investigate and document the allegation. If it is determined 
by a preponderance of the evidence that inappropriate 
conduct occurred, the Boston Public Schools will take such 
actions as it deems appropriate under the circumstances. 
For students, such actions will be consistent with the Code 
of Conduct, and may also include training, mediation, or 
restorative practices. For employees, such actions will be 
consistent with the district’s labor practices, and may 
include training, restorative practices, and/or discipline. 
10. Submit Section 2 of the Equity Student Incident & 
Investigation Form within 10 days of the incident. When 
completing the narrative, staff should document witness 
statements and the subject’s response to the allegation(s). 
Additionally, staff should document the investigatory 
findings and remedial action taken, if any. The form can be 
submitted digitally via this link. 
During the investigation, the alleged target of the 
misconduct should not discuss the incident with the subject 
of the concern present under any circumstances. 
 
For detailed guidance on investigating and documenting 
allegations of sexual misconduct, please follow the Boston 
Public Schools Protocols for Sexual Misconduct 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 10 of 14 
 
 
 
Investigations Conducted by School Leaders and Central 
Office Managers. 
 
All reports submitted through the Equity Student Incident & 
Investigation Form will be reviewed by the Office of Equity. 
PROHIBITION OF RETALIATION 
Retaliation against an individual who reports sexual misconduct 
and retaliation against individuals for cooperating with a related 
investigation is unlawful and will not be tolerated by the Boston 
Public Schools. 
Reports of retaliation should be brought to the building 
administrator or the person who is conducting the investigation. 
A student who feels there has been retaliation following a 
complaint may also call the Office of Equity at 617-635-9650.  
BPS TITLE IX COORDINATOR 
The Boston Public Schools’ Title IX coordinator is responsible for 
ensuring compliance with the investigatory process outlined in 
EQT-3, and tracking incidents across the district. Any parent or 
employee who raises concerns regarding the investigatory 
process and/or outcomes may contact the district’s Title IX 
coordinator: 
 
Director of Compliance and Title IX Coordinator 
Boston Public Schools 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 617-635-9650, Fax: 617-635-7940  


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 11 of 14 
 
 
 
Email: bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org 
OTHER RESOURCES  
United States Department of Education Office for Civil Rights 
(OCR) 
5 Post Office Square, 8th Floor, Boston, MA 02109 
(617) 289-0111 
 
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (MCAD) 
Office Location: 
Address: 
Boston 
One Ashburton Place, Room 601 
Boston, MA 02108 
(617) 994-6000 
Springfield 
436 Dwight Street, Suite 220 
Springfield, MA 01103 
(413) 739-2145 
New Bedford 
 
800 Purchase Street, Room 501 
New Bedford, MA 02740  
(508) 990-2390 
Worcester 
484 Main Street, Room 320 
Worcester, MA 01608 
(508) 453-9630 
 
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education 
Program Quality Assurance 
75 Pleasant Street, Malden, MA 02148-4906 
(781) 338-3700 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 12 of 14 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Training and School Support 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
Email: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
For matters involving DCF, contact: 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor  
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 13 of 14 
 
 
 
APPENDIX A:  CHECKLIST FOR SCHOOL ADMINISTRATORS 
These instructions assume that the Office of Equity has already 
been informed of an incident as required, and that a school 
administrator has been instructed to follow this protocol.  
After receiving a report of sexual misconduct, including sexual 
harassment and sexual violence, the school or central office 
administrator (or the elementary or secondary school 
superintendent, elementary or secondary school assistant 
superintendent, and/or operational leader if the complaint is 
against the school or central office administrator) must 
immediately:  
 Receive a disclosure of sexual misconduct. Whoever the 
students report to first must document the following:  
1. Who is the subject of the concern? 
2. What did the subject say or do? 
3. If physical contact was made, where did the subject 
touch you (clarify if contact was made above clothing 
or directly on the student’s skin)? 
4. Is this the first time something like this happened? 
5. Was anyone else there when it happened? 
6. Did you tell anyone else what happened?  
Students cannot be interviewed more than once by a BPS 
employee and should only be interviewed with one adult in 
the room. 
 Assess the need for emergency interim measures and 
implement as appropriate.  


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 14 of 14 
 
 
 
 Report the incident to your school’s Safety Specialist or 
Safety Services at (617) 635-8000 if the allegation involves 
sexual violence, such as physical contact or threats. Call 
Safety Services even if you are not sure if the alleged 
incident constitutes sexual violence. If Safety Services is not 
available, call 911. 
 Contact the Department of Child and Family Services to file 
a 51A report if the allegation warrants. 
 Alert the Operational Leader. In addition, upon request of 
the Office of Equity, alert the school’s elementary or 
secondary school superintendent.  
 Notify the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of the alleged 
target of the misconduct, unless the parent/legal guardian is 
the subject of the investigation and/or such notification will 
create a substantial risk to the student’s health, safety, or 
welfare.  
 Notify the subject’s parent(s) or legal guardian(s) if that 
individual is a minor. 
 Submit Section 1 of the Equity Student Incident & 
Investigation Form within the same school day if possible, 
but always within 48 hours of the incident.   
 Investigate and document the allegations consistent with 
the Office of Equity Protocols to determine if a violation of 
the circular has occurred. If a Code of Conduct violation is 
found, conduct disciplinary proceedings. 
 Submit Section 2 of the Equity Student Incident & 
Investigation Form within 10 days of the incident. 
 


