Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
EQT-09  
Version 01 
 
 
 
TRANSGENDER AND GENDER NONCONFORMING 
EMPLOYEE NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF 
GENDER IDENTITY AND EXPRESSION 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version.  
The Boston Public Schools is committed to maintaining a 
workplace free of bias-based conduct and discrimination where 
all employees can flourish. All Boston Public Schools are to be 
free from bias and discrimination on the basis of sex, sexual 
orientation, and/or gender identity. 
This circular sets forth guidelines to address the needs of 
transgender and gender non-conforming employees and clarifies 
the Office of Equity’s investigatory process. This circular does not 
anticipate every situation that might occur with respect to 
transgender or gender non-conforming employees, and the 
needs of each transgender or gender non-conforming employee 
must be assessed on a case-by-case basis.  
Reports of bias, discrimination or harassment based on a person’s 
actual or perceived gender identity or gender nonconformity are 
handled in the same manner as other reports of bias-based 
conduct. Students, employees, and third parties alleged to have 
violated this policy (EQT-09) will be investigated and addressed 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-09 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 
 
according to the protocols detailed in Superintendent’s Circular 
EQT-05, “Employee Reports of Bias-Based Conduct.” 
DEFINITIONS 
The definitions provided below are not intended to label or limit 
employees’ individual identities or experiences, but rather to 
assist in understanding this circular and the district’s legal 
obligations. Although these are the most commonly used terms, 
employees may or may not choose to use these terms to describe 
their gender identity, appearance, or behavior. 
 
 
• Gender Identity: Defined under Massachusetts law as “a 
person’s gender-related identity, appearance, or behavior, 
whether or not that gender-related identity, appearance, or 
behavior is different from that traditionally associated with 
the person’s physiology or assigned sex at birth.”  
• Gender Expression: The way a person represents or 
expresses gender to others, often through behavior, 
clothing, hairstyles, activities, voice, or mannerisms. 
 
 
• Transgender: A person whose gender identity or expression 
is different from that traditionally associated with the 
assigned sex at birth. 
 
 
 
 
 
• Gender Nonconforming: People whose gender identity 
and/or gender expression do not conform to traditional 
societal expectations or norms. The terms “gender 
nonbinary,” “gender variant,” or “gender-atypical” may also 
be used.  
 
 
 
 
• Queer: While historically and sometimes currently 
considered an offensive term, “queer” has been reclaimed 
by many members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-09 
Page 3 of 8 
 
 
 
transgender (LGBT) community as a term of empowerment. 
The term generally refers to a member of the LGBT and/or 
gender nonconforming community. This term may be used 
by someone who identifies as a member of the LGBT 
community, but who does not specifically consider 
themselves to be lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender. 
Since this term has a negative history, it should only be used 
to describe individuals who identify themselves as queer 
and give permission for others to use that term to describe 
them. 
 
 
 
 
 
• Transition: The process by which a person goes from living 
and identifying as one gender to living and identifying as 
another. Transitions may include physical, social, and/or 
medical processes. Not all transgender or gender 
nonconforming people transition or desire to transition in 
the same way. Transitions are private, and personal 
information about a transition should not be discussed 
unless the conversation is initiated and led by the 
transgender or gender-nonconforming employee.  
RESPONSIBILITIES 
The Boston Public Schools Office of Equity is responsible for 
ensuring compliance with this circular and ensuring that all 
school administrators and Central Office department heads are 
trained and prepared to comply with their obligations under this 
circular. 
PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
Transgender and gender nonconforming employees have the 
right to discuss their gender identity or expression openly or 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-09 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 
 
keep that information private. The employee has the right to 
decide when, with whom, and how much to share when 
speaking about their identity or expression.  
BPS Central Office employees, school personnel, and other 
parties employed, contracted by, or serving as volunteers in the 
district should not disclose information that may reveal an 
employee’s transgender status or gender nonconforming 
presentation to others without their express permission. Private 
and confidential information may only be shared with the 
transgender employee’s consent, and with employees who truly 
need to know to execute their job requirements.  
DRESS AND APPEARANCE 
Boston Public Schools does not have dress codes that restrict 
employees’ clothing or appearance on the basis of gender. 
Transgender and gender nonconforming employees have the 
right to dress in a manner consistent with their gender identity 
and/or gender expression.  
NAMES AND PRONOUNS 
An employee has the right to be addressed by the name and 
pronoun that corresponds to the employee’s gender identity in 
the workplace, including by their colleagues, and for school-
based employees, by their students. A court-ordered name or 
gender change is not required. The intentional refusal to respect 
an employee’s gender identity may constitute a violation of the 
district’s circular, Bias-Based Conduct Toward Employees (EQT-
05) and/or state and federal anti-discrimination laws. If a district 
employee is unsure what pronoun a staff member uses, they 
should ask the employee how they would like to be addressed. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-09 
Page 5 of 8 
 
 
 
PUBLIC FACILITIES ACCESSIBILITY 
Employees have a right to access safe and appropriate facilities, 
including the right to use a restroom and/or locker room that 
corresponds to the employee’s gender identity, regardless of the 
employee’s sex assigned at birth. Any employee who has a need 
or desire for increased privacy will be provided access to a single-
stall restroom and/or private area, if available. No employee 
should be required to use a single-stall restroom or a private 
changing area.  
TRANSITIONING AT BPS 
Employees who transition during their BPS employment can 
expect the support of the Office of Human Capital and the Office 
of Equity. These two offices will work with each transitioning 
employee individually to ensure a successful workplace 
transition.  
BEFORE THE WORKPLACE TRANSITION BEGINS 
Transitioning employees are encouraged to work in partnership 
with the Office of Equity and Office of Human Capital to learn 
more about the district’s transgender-related policies, and the 
availability of transition-related health care benefits. 
 
All relevant parties should discuss a workplace transition plan, 
including the employee, the employee’s supervisor, and others as 
appropriate. A work plan should specify: 
• The date selected by the employee for when the transition 
will officially and formally take place. This date will 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-09 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 
 
correspond to the date the employee changes their gender 
expression, name, and pronouns. Employees may also 
choose to start using the bathroom and other facilities that 
correspond to their gender identity on this date. The 
employee has the right to revise the start date and other 
aspects of the plan based on their evolving needs and 
preferences. 
• How and in what format the transitioning employee will 
notify co-workers or personnel who need to know.  
• What, if any, training will be provided to co-workers, 
students, or other appropriate personnel or families.  
• What updates should be made to the transitioning 
employee’s records, and when they will be made.  
• The dates of any leaves that may be needed for pre-
scheduled medical procedures or treatment, if applicable. 
BIAS-BASED CONDUCT, DISCRIMINATION, AND HARASSMENT 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to maintaining a 
workplace free of bias-based conduct and discrimination where 
all employees can flourish.  
 
Reports of bias, discrimination, or harassment based on a 
person’s actual or perceived gender identity or gender 
nonconformity are handled in the same manner as other reports 
of bias-based conduct. The Boston Public Schools utilizes the 
procedures outlined in EQT-05, Bias-Based Conduct Toward 
Employees. These procedures are designed to facilitate a prompt 
and effective internal review and resolution of allegations of bias-


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-09 
Page 7 of 8 
 
 
 
based conduct, discrimination, or harassment based on 
sex/gender, gender identity, gender expression, and sexual 
orientation.  
RELATED RESOURCES 
• Links to laws, regulations, cases, and web sources on 
gender identity or expression law can be found at 
Massachusetts Law About Gender Identity or Expression. 
• Contact the Office of Equity at 617-635-9650 or 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org for information about 
additional training and support.  
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-09 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner:  
Director of Training and School Support 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., 5th Floor, Roxbury, 
MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9291 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
Email: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


