Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
SCP-01 
Version 01 
 
 
SCHOOL COMMUNITY PARTNERS 
 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
BPS deeply values the essential role that School-Community 
Partners play in our collective efforts to eliminate opportunity 
and achievement gaps. To advance our goals of providing BPS 
students and families equitable access to high-quality partner 
opportunities and create more coherence, alignment, and 
understanding of the complex and extensive partnership 
landscape, BPS requires the implementation of this PartnerBPS 
(www.partnerbps.org) Policy for all BPS schools and for all BPS 
School-Community Partners.  
POLICY STATEMENT  
Any School-Community Partner providing any services in any 
BPS school must register and update their information annually 
via the PartnerBPS Partnership Platform. BPS requires all School-
Community Partners to be fully registered and approved via the 
PartnerBPS platform before providing any services within any 
school.  
 
DEFINITION OF A SCHOOL-COMMUNITY PARTNER  
A School-Community Partner is an organization, group, or 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SCP-01 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
coalition that intentionally collaborates with the Boston Public 
Schools to provide ongoing, direct services to BPS students, staff, 
families, and/or other members of the school community. This 
broad definition encompasses a variety of groups, including 
community-based organizations, colleges and universities, 
businesses or corporations, hospitals, government agencies, 
cultural institutions, nonprofit or non-governmental 
organizations and faith-based organizations.  
 
IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES FOR SCHOOLS  
A. School principals/school leaders/heads of school and/or a 
school staff member designated by the principal/head of 
school must identify all School-Community Partners 
providing services within the school building at the start of 
each school year within the www.partnerBPS.org website. 
This can be an agreement, contract, or Scope of Work 
outlining services provided and expectations on both sides. 
If the partner is a paid partner, the school is responsible for 
entering the requisition before the partner begins providing 
services to the school and providing this requisition number 
to the partner. No Boston Public School employee, other 
than those listed below, is authorized to enter a contract 
with any vendor.  This includes, but is not limited to 
contracts, agreements, memorandums of understanding, 
grants, partnership agreements, or any other expenditure 
that binds the district to payment for services/goods.  This 
includes purchases for services or goods for under $10,000. 
B. If additional School-Community Partners begin work at the 
school site during the school year, the designated school 
staff must also ensure the partner is registered and all 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SCP-01 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
agreements entered www.partnerBPS.org before services 
can begin. 
C. The school designee must ensure that all current School-
Community Partners are registered on PartnerBPS by 
August 31st of the upcoming academic school year. 
D. School leader or designee will require all new partners 
brokered throughout the school year to register in 
PartnerBPS before beginning services at the school.  
E. School leaders or designee must review their PartnerBPS 
School Partnership profile annually to verify and rate the 
partnerships listed on their profile. Review, verification, and 
rating should be conducted by June 30, before the end of 
the school year.  
F. Schools should use PartnerBPS as a resource for accessing 
and brokering partner opportunities and helping students 
and families identify and access partner opportunities.  
 
IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES FOR SCHOOL-COMMUNITY 
PARTNERS 
All School-Community Partners must be fully registered and 
approved on PartnerBPS.org before providing any type of service 
in a BPS school.  
In order for School-Community Partners to be considered fully 
registered, they must complete three steps: organization 
registration, program registration, and partnership registration. 
Further instructions and tutorial information on registering for 
PartnerBPS can be found at https://partnerbps.org/help-school-
community-partners/.  
All registered School-Community Partners must update their 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SCP-01 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
PartnerBPS profile by September 30 before providing their 
services in schools. Updates should include registration of all 
school partnerships for the upcoming year, an update of current 
information in organization and program profiles, and 
completion of any questions that have been added by the 
School-Community Partnerships team.  
As part of this process, School-Community Partners should work 
with partner schools to establish a school-based partnership 
agreement which they should then upload onto PartnerBPS.org.  
In addition to the annual updates, School-Community Partners 
should regularly monitor their profiles and keep information up 
to date. At minimum, review and necessary revisions should be 
completed by November 1 and April 1 of each school year.  
All School-Community Partners are required to be aware of and 
follow the guidelines outlined within the Guide for School 
Community Partners.  
Appropriate and authorized BPS staff reserve the right to deny 
approval of partners if they do not meet basic safety or quality 
standards set forth by BPS, including those found within the 
Guide for School Community Partners. 
IMPLEMENTATION MONITORING & SUPPORT 
A. The Office of Family and Community Advancement’s 
Partnerships Team will approve and/or follow up with 
registering partners after registration completion. If 
additional information is required before registration 
approval can be granted, the Team will contact the 
administrator of the respective PartnerBPS account for 
more information.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SCP-01 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
B. The Partnerships Team will provide partners and schools 
with ongoing PartnerBPS technical assistance and support 
using the site. In addition, support resources are available 
online at https://partnerbps.org/help-school-community-
partners/.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Partnerships 
Department: Office of Family and Community Advancement 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
                                                                   Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


