Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SUP-20 
Version 01 
 
 
CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT 
 
THIS CIRCULAR WILL REMAIN IN EFFECT UNLESS RESCINDED OR 
SUPERSEDED BY A SUBSEQUENT VERSION 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
Massachusetts General Law (Chapter 119, Section 51A) requires 
that certain persons who in their professional capacity have 
reasonable cause to believe that a child under the age of 
eighteen (18) years is suffering serious physical or emotional 
injury resulting from abuse, including sexual abuse, or neglect, 
including malnutrition, inflicted upon them SHALL 
IMMEDIATELY, VIA TELEPHONE, REPORT THIS ABUSE OR 
NEGLECT TO THE DEPARTMENT OF CHILDREN AND FAMILIES, 
either via the attached Area Offices Telephone Directory or via 
the 24-hour reporting hotline: 1-800-792-5200.  
 
Within forty-eight (48) hours of the initial oral report, these 
professionals are required under Massachusetts law to notify the 
Department of Children and Families (DCF) in writing using the 
attached Report Form.  The Report Form should be sent by 
registered mail, with return receipt requested, to the appropriate 
DCF Area Office.  A new Report Form must be completed for 
each new injury or re-injury.  
  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 2 of 15 
 
WHO MUST REPORT? 
By law, the following professionals, among others, are “mandated 
reporters” and must report cases of child abuse or neglect to 
DCF:  physicians, medical interns, medical examiners, dentists, 
nurses, teachers, educational administrators, guidance 
counselors, family counselors, probation officers, school 
attendance officers, social workers, psychologists, and police 
officers.  When these professionals are employed at a school, they 
must either notify DCF directly or, alternatively, notify the person 
in charge of the school or that person’s designated agent. Out of 
an abundance of caution, however, all school professional staff in 
the Boston Public Schools are required to report to DCF any 
instance of neglect or abuse that they observe or which is 
brought to their attention. 
 
Please note that all employees are required to report any 
suspected or alleged bias-based conduct toward a student 
or sexual misconduct toward a student under circulars EQT-
02 and EQT-03. This report must be made to a school 
administrator and/or directly to the Office of Equity. A 
determination will then be made whether it meets the 
standard for a report to the Department of Children and 
Families under SUP-20.  Please see Attachment 1, Procedures 
for Reporting Suspected Child Abuse and Neglect Cases. 
 
Nothing in this policy prohibits a school professional from 
notifying DCF directly when such school professional has 
reasonable cause to believe abuse or neglect occurred.  In the 
event that a school professional notifies the building 
administrator in charge of an incident of suspected abuse or 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 3 of 15 
 
neglect, that building administrator must make a report to DCF 
following the procedures outlined in this circular. 
 
Any other person may report a case of child abuse or neglect 
when there is reasonable cause to believe that a child’s health or 
welfare is being harmed, or is at substantial risk of being harmed, 
as a result of abuse or neglect.  
WHAT TO REPORT? 
Any incident in which there is reasonable cause to believe that a 
child’s physical or mental health or welfare is harmed or is 
threatened with substantial risk of harm through abuse or 
neglect must be reported. Truancy by itself is not a reportable 
matter. This means that a child missing school is not, on its own, 
a reason to report. 
ABUSE. Abuse includes: 
• Physical, mental, or emotional injury by other than 
accidental means, i.e., beatings, cuttings, burns, broken 
bones, multiple bruises  
• Physical dependency on an addictive drug at birth  
• Any sexual act against another person either by force, or by 
threat of force or bodily injury, or against the person’s will.  
This includes a sexual act against another person who is 
incapable of giving consent either because of their 
temporary or permanent mental or physical incapacity or 
because s/he is a minor.  Such crimes as indecent assault 
and battery, rape, rape with force, rape and abuse, assault 
with intent to rape and unnatural and lascivious acts 
constitute a sexual assault.   


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 4 of 15 
 
Indecent assault and battery includes, but is not limited to, 
inappropriate and unwanted touching of private body parts.  
A person under the age of 14 is legally unable to consent to 
this type of sexual activity. 
NEGLECT. Neglect is deemed to exist when the person or persons 
responsible for a child’s care, although financially able to do so, 
fail to provide the child with: 
• Adequate food, clothing, shelter, education, or medical care 
• Proper supervision and/or guardianship. 
 
The attached Procedures for Reporting Suspected Child Abuse or 
Neglect detail the relevant reporting procedures to be followed 
by Boston Public School employees. 
 
IMMUNITY 
All reports will be held in strict confidence.  A person required to 
report who does in fact make a report, including a report of 
abuse or neglect by personnel in the public school system, shall 
not be held liable in any civil or criminal action by reason of that 
report.  In addition, a person who, although not required to do so 
by statute, voluntarily makes a report shall not be liable in any 
civil or criminal action by reason of that report if it was made in 
good faith and that person did not perpetuate, inflict, or cause 
the reported abuse or neglect. 
In accordance with Massachusetts law (Massachusetts General 
Laws Chapter 119, Section 51B), persons who are mandatory 
reporters of child abuse shall share any relevant information 
requested by the Department of Children and Families during 
the investigation of a specific 51A child abuse report.  Those 
persons who are required to share information are protected 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 5 of 15 
 
from civil or criminal liability for providing such information 
without parental consent. 
CONSEQUENCES FOR VIOLATIONS OF THE REPORTING 
REQUIREMENT 
Under Massachusetts law, any person required to make oral and 
written reports of suspected child abuse or neglect who fails to 
do so and any person who knowingly files a frivolous report will 
be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
Boston Public School employees required by law to report 
suspected child abuse or neglect who fail to do so in accordance 
with the attached procedures will be subject to discipline. 
PROHIBITION OF RETALIATION 
Retaliation against any Boston Public School student or 
employee for filing a complaint of abuse or neglect, including a 
report of abuse or neglect against personnel in the public school 
system, is strictly prohibited.   
In accordance with both Massachusetts law and the attached 
Procedures, any Boston Public School employees who 
themselves perpetuate, inflict, or cause the abuse of any child will 
be subject to discipline as outlined in the attached Procedures. 
ATTACHMENTS: 
• Procedures for Reporting Suspected Child Abuse and 
Neglect Cases 
• Area Offices and Telephone Directory Guide for Reporting 
Purposes 
• DCF 51A Reporting Form     
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 6 of 15 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Student Support 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston MA, 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9000 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 7 of 15 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
 (p. 1 of 6) 
 
PROCEDURES FOR REPORTING SUSPECTED 
CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT CASES 
 
1. Pursuant to Massachusetts General Law Chapter 119, Section 
51A, a mandated reporter is required to report when they has 
“reasonable cause to believe” that a child under the age of 
eighteen (18) years is suffering from abuse or neglect.  Out of 
an abundance of caution, however, all school professional 
staff in the Boston Public Schools are required to report to 
DCF any instance of neglect or abuse that they observe or 
which is brought to their attention. 
 
2. Upon such suspicion of abuse or neglect of a child under 18 
years of age, a teacher, or any other mandated reporter, will 
immediately report their concerns to the building 
administrator and will confer with the school nurse. Such 
abuse includes but is not limited to physical, mental, or 
emotional injury by other than accidental means (e.g. 
beatings, cuttings, burns, broken bones, multiple bruises). In 
the event of suspected physical abuse, a school nurse should 
be contacted to immediately examine and document the 
child’s physical condition.  Appropriate Special Education and 
Support Services staff should be notified of the situation 
concerning the suspected abuse or neglect.   
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 8 of 15 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
 (p. 2 of 6) 
 
3. Upon suspicion of sexual assault, please refer immediately 
to the Equity Circular on Sexual Misconduct Toward Students 
(EQT-03) and follow the reporting procedures outlined in that 
circular.  School personnel responding to sexual assault 
concerns will obtain only basic minimal facts of the alleged 
incident.  These basic facts should include:  (1) when the 
incident occurred; (2) where the incident occurred; (3) who 
assaulted the student, if known; (4) the nature of the 
incident; and (5) whether there are known witnesses and/or 
other victims.  In an attempt to minimize the emotional 
stress victims of abuse experience and to preserve the 
integrity and reliability of the required DCF and law 
enforcement investigations, additional interviews and more 
detailed probing questioning are not to be conducted by 
school officials. A student who reports being a victim of a 
sexual assault should never be asked to submit a written 
report detailing the incident nor be asked to discuss the 
incident with the alleged perpetrator present at any time 
and under any circumstances.  School personnel are 
mandated reporters but should not investigate the 
allegations or prepare a probing and/or detailed incident 
report. 
 
4. The building administrator or designee shall compile any and 
all relevant information from school professionals with 
knowledge of the incident and student.  They shall also 
compile any and all relevant information from school records 
to be used when reporting the case to the appropriate DCF 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 9 of 15 
 
Area Office and have all such information and records 
available for DCF.   
 
5. The building administrator must report to DCF even if they 
believe that the teacher, nurse, or other mandated reporter is 
mistaken in suspecting abuse or neglect. The building 
administrator may not substitute their judgment for that of 
any mandated reporter within the school.  The failure to file 
a report as mandated by law will subject the building 
administrator (or other mandated reporter who fails to 
meet their statutory obligations) to discipline in 
accordance with BPS employee discipline procedures. 
 
6. The building administrator or designee must immediately 
call the DCF Screening Area Office to report the case. If the 
report must be made after 5:00 PM, the building 
administrator or designee must immediately call the DCF 
Hotline number at 1-800-792-5200.   
 
7. The child must not be sent home from school before the 
verbal 51A report is filed with DCF.  A written report must be 
forwarded within 48 hours. 
 
8. Within 48 hours of the initial oral report, the building 
administrator or designee will send written notification to the 
DCF Area Office via fax or via the Virtual Gateway Portal at 
Mass.gov.  A confidential copy of the written notification form 
(copy attached) should be retained in the office of the 
principal or headmaster.   
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 10 of 15 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
 (p. 4 of 6) 
 
 
9. If the alleged abuser is an employee of the Boston School 
Department, a copy of the notification should also be 
forwarded to the BPS Office of the Labor Relations.  If an 
investigation confirms the allegations, the offending 
employee will be subject to discipline in accordance with 
BPS employee discipline procedures. 
 
10. The building administrator, in consultation with others as 
necessary, will decide how, when, and by whom the family, 
including the child who is suspected of being abused or 
neglected, will be notified of this report. Although the school 
is not required by law to notify the family, such notification is 
recommended.  In deciding whether to notify, the building 
administrator and others should consider whether 
notification will create a substantial risk to the student’s 
health, safety, or welfare.  DCF and the police and the 
Department of Social Work can provide consultation in 
making this determination to ensure the child’s safety and 
well-being.  
 
11. DCF investigators, who report to the school in order to 
conduct one phase of their investigation, should be required 
to identify themselves and to verify their assignment to the 
case.  School-based staff should encourage them to interview 
the child at home in the presence of the parent or caregiver, 
unless the 51A has been filed against the parent.  In this latter 
case, the interview of the child may be conducted in school 
in the presence of the building administrator or designee.  
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 11 of 15 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
 (p. 5 of 6) 
 
 
12. Within sixty (60) days of filing a report, the building 
administrator should receive a feedback report from DCF 
detailing the department’s findings and specifying the social 
services that the department intends to offer the child. This 
feedback report may be used to plan further collaboration 
with other professionals assisting the family. 
 
13. Certain cases that the schools report to DCF (sexual abuse 
and exploitation, serious physical abuse, and some others) 
will also be referred by DCF to the local police and the District 
Attorney’s Office for investigation.  In these circumstances, 
these agencies will typically conduct a multidisciplinary team 
investigation.  This investigation will typically include an 
interview with the alleged victim(s), alleged perpetrators(s), 
and witness(es).  Relevant investigative information will be 
provided to the school when appropriate, and as permitted 
by law.   
 
14. Throughout the reporting, investigation, and follow-up 
process, school documentation must be done in a way that 
ensures confidentiality.  Accordingly, reports of suspected 
abuse or neglect will not be part of a child’s educational 
record, but will instead be kept separately.  The school will 
maintain files of the 51A reports of suspected abuse or 
neglect for no more than five years. 
 
 
 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 12 of 15 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
 (p. 6 of 6) 
 
15. When a building administrator seeks to remove a child from 
school because of, for example, a disciplinary emergency 
removal or illness, a parent may not always be available to 
pick the child up. Other childcare, eldercare, school or work 
responsibilities, or lack of transportation may delay or 
prevent a parent from being able to immediately pick up the 
child from school. This is not, on its own, a reportable matter. 
Maintaining the child’s safety at school or ensuring that the 
child has a safe way to return home is the building 
administrator’s responsibility. 
 
16. Importantly, a special education dispute is not, on its own, a 
reportable matter. A parent disagreeing with school staff’s 
opinions that a child needs a particular special education 
placement, service, or evaluation is not a reportable matter. 
In such situations, school staff should contact the assigned 
special education district assistant program director.  
 
17. Each school building will designate a representative who will 
ensure that, in the event of the building administrator’s 
absence, the above reporting procedures are followed as 
required by law.  School Health will make arrangements for 
emergency nursing staff coverage so that the required 
investigation, discussed above, will begin before the end of 
the day.   
 
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 13 of 15 
 
EMERGENCY PROTOCOL 
 
In the event of a clear emergency where the life or safety of a child 
is in imminent danger, the building administrator, designee, or 
other mandated reporter should immediately notify the 
appropriate DCF Area Office and file the required 51A Report.  
After 5:00 PM, the school official should use the Massachusetts 
Child Abuse Emergency Hotline, at 1-800-792-5200.   A written 
report must be filed within forty-eight hours. 
 
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 119, Section 51B(3) authorizes 
the Department of Children and Families to take a child into 
immediate temporary custody, without parental permission or 
prior notice, if the department has reasonable cause to believe 
that this action is necessary to protect the child from further 
abuse or neglect.  Emergency responses by the Department of 
Children and Families may include law enforcement, 
depending upon the nature of the incident reported.  If DCF 
seeks to exercise this authority in the school setting, the building 
administrator shall: 
 
1. Verify the DCF representative’s identification and retain a copy 
of the identification in the student record 
 
2. Contact the DCF representative’s immediate supervisor to verify 
the need for the DCF action 
 
3.   
Maintain a log, which should be filed with the office copy of 
the 51A report, of the action, the DCF employee(s) involved, and 
the DCF Area Office involved; and provide any other pertinent 
information related to the suspected abuse or neglect. 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 14 of 15 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
DEPARTMENT OF CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 
Boston-Brookline Region Area Directory 
 
Boston Regional Office 
1785 Columbus Ave. Fifth Floor  
Roxbury, MA 02119-1041Local Number:  (617) 989-9200 
Fax Number:  (617) 989-9250 
 
Hyde Park Area Office 
1530 River Street 
Hyde Park, MA  02136 
Local Number:  (617) 363-5000 
Fax Number:  (617) 363-5175 
 
Dimock Street Area Office 
30 Dimock Street 
Roxbury, MA  02119 
Local Number:  (617) 989-2800 
Fax Number:  (617) 445-9147 
 
Park Street Area Office 
50 Park Street 
Dorchester, MA  02122 
Local Number:  (617) 822-4700 
Fax Number:  (617) 282-1019 
 
 
 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 15 of 15 
 
Harbor Area Office 
80 Everett Avenue, Suite 100Chelsea, MA  01250 
Local Number:  (617) 660-3400 
Fax Number:  (617) 884-0215 
 
 
BOSTON POLICE DEPARTMENT – FAMILY JUSTICE CENTER 
(Formerly the Sexual Assault Unit) 
 
Main Number: (617) 343-4400 
 
SUFFOLK COUNTY DISTRICT ATTORNEY’S OFFICE 
 
Main Number: (617) 619-4000 
Child Abuse Unit: (617) 619-4300  
 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 3 
 
DCF 51A Reporting Form    


