Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER:  
FSE-08 
Version 01 
 
 
  
SAFE MODE AND INTERNAL THREAT PROCEDURES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Mandatory SAFE MODE drills are to be planned, conducted and 
reviewed during September and January of each school year. Each 
school should conduct two SAFE MODE drills every year. These 
exercises are to be coordinated through your school superintendents. 
A report on each safe mode drill must be documented on the Google 
form, which can be found at the BPS Fire & Safety Drill Report.  If you 
have any questions, please contact the BPS Office of Emergency 
Management. 
 
These drills will help prepare the school community for any real life 
situation that may occur. 
 
During any real-life situation:  
● Call 911 as soon as you can do so safely.   
● Call the Department of Safety Services at 617-635-8000, after 
calling 911, if you can do so safely. 
  
Objectives of SAFE MODE drills: 
● Staff will be able to describe what SAFE MODE is and their 
responsibilities during a SAFE MODE event. 
● Staff will have the opportunity to have their questions 
concerning SAFE MODE heard and answered. 


Page 2:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 2 of 13 
 
● Staff will have the opportunity to raise potential concerns that 
have not yet been addressed to assist in better anticipating 
issues during SAFE MODE  situations. 
 
DEFINITIONS AND PROTOCOL FOR ACTUAL EVENTS 
  
SAFE MODE (External Threat) 
SAFE MODE is a protective action used to safeguard faculty, staff, 
and students from an external threat as a result of law enforcement 
activity near the school or a potentially dangerous situation near the 
school. Schools will typically be placed into SAFE MODE by the 
Boston Police Department or BPS Safety Services, but each school 
can enter SAFE MODE on its own.  
 
Examples of reasons why schools go into SAFE MODE:  
● Police activity around or near your building  
● Shooting outside your building  
● Fire or accident near your building  
 
How will you know when you are in SAFE MODE? 
The Principal/Head of School, Site Coordinator or designee will 
announce the following via intercom and/or using the school safety 
team: 
 
"Attention faculty and students: We are now in SAFE MODE. 
Remain in your classroom. If you are in the hallway, stairs, or 
lavatory, move into the nearest classroom. Do not leave the room 
until told to do so, even if an alarm sounds." 
 


Page 3:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 3 of 13 
 
NOTE: The Principal/Head of School, Site Coordinator or designee 
will also be alerting Safety Services and calling 911 to alert them 
that they are in SAFE MODE if not a drill, as mentioned above. 
  
What should faculty and staff do upon notification of SAFE MODE? 
1. If you see, hear, or observe a potential threat outside your 
building, bring all students and staff back into the building 
immediately and initiate SAFE MODE and notifications.  
2. Depending on the circumstances and the direction of the 
Principal/Head of School, Site Coordinator or their designee, 
learning activities may continue during a SAFE MODE. If 
continuing learning activities, be sure the volume in the room 
is low enough to hear further announcements.  
3. Check the hallways for people nearby and bring them into the 
classroom. 
4. Check adjacent classrooms through interior doors for 
unsupervised students. 
5. Lock the classroom door. 
6. Be prepared to barricade your doors, cover large door windows 
using any available resources (e.g., large paper or felt), and close 
the windows and shades (if you have them). Turn the lights off 
and silence cell phones, radios, Tv and any other source of noise 
as necessary.  
7. Be prepared to move students away from windows and doors 
and stay in your  safe location. 
8. Take attendance. Verify the missing and extra people in your 
room. Write the names on a sheet of paper and wait for 
someone to contact you for that list (may be by intercom or in 
person). 


Page 4:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 4 of 13 
 
9.  Ramain with your students in the classroom until further 
instructions are given. 
10.  Only use the intercom to notify the main office of emergencies 
or special needs. 
11. SAFE MODE ends only when the principal/head of school, site 
coordinator or designee announces it via intercom or through 
door to door notifications. 
  
What will the safety team be doing during SAFE MODE? 
1. Administration will make sure exterior doors are locked. 
2. Floor captains will check classrooms and lock bathrooms. 
3. Administration will notify all staff via the public address system 
of the situation. 
4. Administration will notify Safety Services and their school 
superintendent if they are in an actual SAFE MODE. They will 
notify their school superintendent if they will be conducting a 
SAFE MODE drill. 
5. Administration or police will monitor cameras. 
6. Administration or police will monitor the entire school to make 
sure no one is in the hallways or leaving or entering the 
building. 
7. Administration will work with BPS Communications to send a 
notice to all families within a short time after the incident when 
the situation is clear. 
 
Preventative Safe Mode: This version of SAFE MODE can be used to 
stop motion in the building under certain circumstances to resolve 
an internal issue (e.g., lost children, student/adult behavior, K9 
search, etc.). 
 


Page 5:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 5 of 13 
 
How will you know when you are in PREVENTATIVE SAFE MODE? 
The Principal/Head of School, Site Coordinator or designee will 
announce the following via intercom and/or using the school safety 
team: 
 
"Attention faculty and students: We are now in PREVENTATIVE SAFE 
MODE. Remain in your classroom. If you are in the hallway, stairs, or 
lavatory, move into the nearest classroom. Do not leave the room 
until told to do so, even if an alarm sounds." 
 
If schools want to conduct internal threats drills, they should only do 
so with staff. No students should be involved in an internal threat 
drill.  If there are concerns about these drills or procedures, they 
should only be discussed with staff.   
 
INTERNAL THREAT (Interior) 
INTERNAL THREAT will be announced if there is any person in the 
building who is looking to cause harm to people.  If an internal threat 
is in the building, all occupants should use the AVOID, DENY, 
DEFEND (formerly RUN, HIDE, FIGHT) model to protect themselves 
and anyone in their care. During this situation, occupants should use 
their own judgment to determine what they will do.  
 
Examples of an INTERNAL THREAT are:  
● Unknown  or unidentified  people in your building wandering 
around  
● Out of control parent/family member 
● Person with a weapon in the building  
● Person shooting in your building  
 


Page 6:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 6 of 13 
 
 
How will I know when we have an INTERNAL THREAT? 
The Principal/Head of School, Site Coordinator or designee will 
announce the following via the school intercom (and call 911 if not a 
drill): 
 
“Attention faculty and students:  there is an INTERNAL THREAT 
(AVOID, DENY, DEFEND).” 
 
What will be happening on campus during an INTERNAL THREAT 
situation? 
1. No one will be in hallways.  
2. Anyone with information on the threat should be calling 911 to 
alert police of the situation. 
3. Occupants will be using the AVOID, DENY, DEFEND protocol 
to decide their actions:  
● AVOID (RUN) pay attention to your surroundings, know 
your exits if you know it is safe to do so: get as far away 
from the building or source of threat as you can (you should 
not be able to see the building/threat from where you have 
run to).  If it is safe to do, call 911, call the School Leader and 
Safety Services at 617-635-8000. Cautiously alert people 
around you if possible.  
● DENY (HIDE) if you cannot run: barricade where you are (if 
you can) and stay out of sight of the threat,lock the door, 
turn off the light. Silence your phone, radios, tv and/or any 
other source of noise.  
● DEFEND (FIGHT) If you cannot Avoid or Deny  be prepared 
to defend yourself. If fighting is your last resort and the 
threat is in your space and is going to hurt you or people 


Page 7:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 7 of 13 
 
you are with, find something to fight (laptop, chair, fire 
extinguisher or any other available resources).   
All staff should consider what to do during an internal threat on a 
regular basis. HAVE A PLAN! 
 
HELPFUL HINTS:  “KNOW YOUR SPACE” 
● Know all available egress (EXIT) points if you ever need to 
AVOID (RUN). 
● Know what you can use to barricade your door(s) and conceal 
yourself from sight if you ever need to DENY (HIDE). 
● Know what you can use to DEFEND (FIGHT) if fighting is your 
only option (fire extinguisher, chair, laptop, etc.).  
● The goal of both SAFE MODE and INTERNAL THREAT is to take 
cover and conceal yourself and your students from the active 
assailant. Covering glass (with large paper, shades, etc), 
shutting off lights, staying quiet (silence your phone, radios, 
TV or any other source of noise) and moving into a position of 
concealment is key. 
 
 
POLICE RESPONSE: “KNOW WHAT TO EXPECT” 
● Law enforcement priorities:  
1. Neutralize the shooter   
2. Stop the bleed of the first critical victim they encounter 
(only if the shooter is not in the immediate location. This is 
a new protocol.) 
● When police arrive, follow their commands, show the palms of 
your hands, don’t move quickly. 
● BPD policy is that plainclothes officers can respond to an active 
assailant, help may not be in uniform.  


Page 8:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 8 of 13 
 
 
 
DEFINITIONS AND PROTOCOL FOR SAFE MODE DRILLS  
 
How to conduct a Safe Mode Drill at your school? 
 
Identify a Safety Team if you have not already done so (Refer to 
Safety Contingency Plan FSE-01). This Safety Team should include 
the School Leader, Assistant School Leader, Site Coordinator, 
Secretary, Custodian or designees. Please review FSE-01 page 24 
for guidance.  
 
The Principal/School Leader, Site Coordinator or designee must 
ensure that staff receive and understand proper instructions on 
the safe mode drill procedure. Students should also be informed 
of the procedure in order to align expectations prior to the drill. 
The drill must be recorded on this form.  
 
Prior to the Drill:  
Confirm the Plan: School Leader/Site Coordinators or designee 
will review the Safe Mode and Internal Threat Procedures, 
including the various situations and levels of Safe Mode (ie 
external threat/ medical issue/ internal threat) with staff. Select 
the date of the drill and coordinate roles and responsibilities 
during and after the drill. 
 
Day of the drill:  
Just in Time Training: School Leaders/Site Coordinators or 
designee  will instruct staff to review Safe Mode and Internal 
Threat Procedures ensuring everyone knows their roles 


Page 9:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 9 of 13 
 
(Students/Staff). Also staff should confirm window covers are 
available (shades/blinds/paper/boards, etc) and classroom doors 
can lock properly from the exterior. Familiarize yourself with the 
system used to warn you to go into Safe Mode, this may be the 
public address system, if available, an intercom system, phones 
or radios. If the only method to communicate within the school 
is the bell system, note the warning bell system used to warn 
everyone to Safe Mode. 
*Listen carefully for instructions* 
Conducting Safe Mode Drill: 
1. Inject: Safe Mode ANNOUNCEMENT is made via the PA, with 
the support of radios to areas where the PA does not reach. 
2. Staff and students go inside the building into the nearest 
classroom immediately if they are not already.  
3. Staff check the hallways for other staff/students nearby and 
bring them into the classroom.  
4. Staff check adjacent classrooms through interior doors for 
unsupervised students.  
5. Lock the classroom doors. 
6. Close and lock the windows. 
7. Be prepared to barricade your doors, cover large door windows 
using any available resources (e.g., large paper or felt), and 
close the windows and shades (if you have them).  
8. Move students away from windows and doors and stay in your 
current location.  
9. CONDUCT AN ACCOUNTABILITY SURVEY Verify the missing 
and extra people in your room. Write the names on a sheet of 
paper and wait for someone to contact you for that list (may 
be by intercom or in person). 


Page 10:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 10 of 13 
 
10.  Stay with your students in the classroom until further 
instructions are given.  
11. Only use the intercom to notify the main office of emergencies 
or special needs.  
12. Silence all cellular devices. 
13. Shut off the lights.  
 
IF THE FIRE ALARM SYSTEM SOUNDS:  
● Evacuate if there are visible signs of fire.  
● Await instructions if there are no signs of fire.  
 
14.  ALL CLEAR/ RETURN TO SCHOOL 
School Leader, Assistant School Leader, Site Coordinator, 
Secretary, Custodian or designee announces ALL CLEAR via 
intercom or through door to door notifications. 
Action: Staff return to normal classroom activities. 
15.  School Leader, Site Coordinator or designee reports the drill 
on this form. If you have any problem with this link, please 
contact the OEM Team for assistance.  
 
Note: Learning activities may continue during a SAFE MODE drill, 
unless you are instructed otherwise by the Principal/School Leader, 
Site Coordinator or designee. If continuing learning activities, be 
sure the volume in the room is low enough to hear further 
announcements. 
 
IMPORTANT REMINDER:  The BPS Office of Emergency 
Management is available to support schools drills as well as 
facilitating tabletop exercises or functional tests of school buildings 
plans and protocol. Please contact us for more information. 
 


Page 11:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 11 of 13 
 
All staff should view the following video from the Ohio State 
University, to obtain important additional information that will be 
helpful in the event that an incident occurs at the school or another 
location. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Emergency Management and 
Preparedness 
Department: Safety & Emergency Management 
Mailing 
Address: 
205 Townsend Street Boston, MA 02121 
Phone: 
(857) 701-9404 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Updated 7.29.2024)


Page 12:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 12 of 13 
 
BPS Safe Mode Announcement Scripts (English) 
Safe Mode (External Threat/ Danger Outside of the School) 
Announcement:  
"Attention faculty and students: We are now in SAFE MODE. Remain in your classroom.  
If you are in the hallway, stairs, or lavatory, move into the nearest classroom.  
Do not leave the room until told to do so, even if an alarm sounds." 
 
Preventative Safe Mode (ex. Missing Student/ Medical Emergency) 
Announcement:  
"Attention faculty and students: We are now in PREVENTATIVE SAFE MODE.  
Remain in your classroom. If you are in the hallway, stairs, or lavatory, move into the nearest classroom.  
Do not leave the room until told to do so, even if an alarm sounds." 
 
Internal Threat (Active Shooter/ Armed Intruder Inside) 
Announcement:  
“Attention faculty and students: there is an INTERNAL THREAT (Avoid, Deny, Defend).” 
 
Know Your Space. Get Safe Before You Call 911. 
Cover versus Concealment. 
Silence is Golden. 
BPS Office of Emergency Management updated 7/2024                      


Page 13:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 13 of 13 
 
BPS Guía para anunciar el “modo seguro”(Spanish) 
Modo seguro (amenaza externa/peligro fuera de la escuela) 
Anuncio: 
"Atención profesores y estudiantes: ahora estamos en MODO SEGURO. Permanezcan en su salón de 
clases. Si está en el pasillo, las escaleras o el baño, diríjase al salón de clases más cercano. No salga 
del salón  hasta que se le indique, incluso si suena una alarma". 
 
Modo seguro preventivo (por ejemplo, estudiante desaparecido/emergencia médica) 
Anuncio: 
"Atención profesores y estudiantes: Ahora estamos en MODO SEGURO PREVENTIVO. Permanezca 
en su salón de clases. Si está en el pasillo, las escaleras o el baño, diríjase al salón de clases más 
cercano. No salga del salón hasta que se le indique, incluso si suena una alarma". 
 
Amenaza interna (tirador activo/intruso armado en el interior) 
Anuncio: 
“Atención profesores y estudiantes: hay una AMENAZA INTERNA (Evita, Deniega, Defiendete).” 
Conozca su espacio. 
Antes de llamar al 911, asegúrese de no estar en peligro (busque un lugar seguro con precaución) 
El silencio es oro. 
 
Oficina de Manejo de Emergencia de BPS 7/2024                      


