Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FSE-02 
Version 01 
 
FIRE SAFETY PRACTICES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
As we begin another school year, it is essential that we review and 
update 
fire 
prevention, 
life 
safety, 
and 
evacuation 
plans/procedures in all our schools. Accordingly, appropriate 
communications 
and 
cooperation 
with 
Fire 
Department 
authorities is imperative. The Boston Fire Department and The 
Office of Emergency Management and Preparedness  cite specific 
areas of concern and responsibility in this directive, which must be 
brought to your attention. 
The following fire safety practices should be incorporated into 
the fire safety section of your school safety/contingency plan: 
A fire safety checklist (Attachment A) must be completed and 
readily available in the main office along with appropriate 
documents including: fire drill reports, fire alarm tests, * fire 
sprinkler system test, fire extinguisher location document, * fire 
pump test, AED location, a copy of most recent BFD quarterly 
inspection report, and Certificate of Occupancy. 
NOTE (*) if applicable: 
The Boston Fire Department has directed that school officials 
designate a member of their school safety team to report to the 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 2 of 15 
 
main entrance of the school to meet and direct arriving fire 
department and other public safety personnel in an emergency. 
This individual is identified as the building coordinator position in 
your school safety plan and is usually the school custodian. 
The building coordinator should be familiar with this circular, your 
building and fire safety reports, and your fire safety checklist; know 
the location of fire notification and extinguishing systems; and 
have access to all areas. Your plan must also identify an alternate 
person to perform this role in the event your custodian is not 
available.  
FIRE ALARMS 
All fire alarm systems must be maintained in working order at all 
times. It is important to remember that the sounding of any fire 
alarm box automatically transmits a signal to the Fire Alarm Office, 
which simultaneously dispatches fire apparatus to the school. 
Fire Department regulations and Mass. General Law Chapter 268, 
Section 32 prohibits the shutting off or tampering with any fire 
alarm system unless directed to do so by the Fire Department. Any 
deficiency or trouble noted with the fire alarm system must be 
reported immediately to Facilities Management/Fire Alarm 
Division at 617-635-8300.  
Upon the evacuation of a school building because of an alarm, no 
person or persons shall re-enter the building without the 
authorization of the fire officer in charge. The principal/head of 
school, site coordinator or designee must, as a part of their fire drill 
procedures, establish a command procedure for such evacuations.  
Upon the sounding of a fire alarm, approved evacuation 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 3 of 15 
 
procedures for all building occupants are to be followed 
immediately, as well as a verification call made to the Fire 
Department at 911 or 617-343-2880. 
Upon arrival, the Boston Fire Department will exercise its authority 
to order all measures that are deemed necessary for the protection 
of persons and property. This authority includes building 
evacuation and reentry. 
DOOR LABELS, NUMBERS OR LETTERING SHALL NOT BE 
REMOVED OR CHANGED 
The interior and exterior doors that are numbered within Boston 
Public Schools should not be removed or changed by anyone 
except for members of the BPS Facilities Management Team. The 
numbers and letterings are crucial to Boston Police, Boston Fire 
and Boston EMS that will need to respond to your school building 
for an emergency.  
Any changes to the numbering or lettering within your school 
building could disrupt any evacuation or safety plans that already 
exist within the school.  
The existing room numbers are also associated with the school’s 
Asbestos Hazard Emergency Response Act (AHERA) Management 
Plan and the Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) sensors. 
If your school is missing any room numbers or lettering, please 
submit a work order to the Facilities Management Team to ensure 
any issues are resolved before the start of  the school year. 
 
MEANS OF EGRESS 
Designated exits in every school must be maintained as means of 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 4 of 15 
 
egress.  
a. Means of egress must be kept free and clear at all times.  
b. The use of chains, ropes, bars, so-called "dutch locks," or any 
other unauthorized device that would impede egress is 
prohibited during times when school buildings are occupied.  
c. No exit door which is intended to be kept closed shall be 
blocked open, and no device or arrangement shall be used to 
prevent a door designed to be self-closing or automatic-
closing from functioning as intended. Use of wedges to hold 
corridor and stairwell doors open is prohibited. 
d. Interconnecting doors between rooms must be clear and free 
of any locks. Fire and smoke doors are not to be propped 
open with wooden wedges or any other means. This is an 
illegal practice and prohibited in all schools. 
FIRE DRILLS 
All schools shall conform to the following fire drill regulations:  
a. The responsible school administrator in charge of the school 
shall formulate a plan for the protection and evacuation of all 
persons in the event of fire or other emergency and shall 
include alternate means of egress for all persons involved. 
Such a plan is to be developed in consultation with 
appropriate representatives of the Boston Fire Department 
and 
BPS 
Director 
of 
Emergency 
Management 
and 
Preparedness. 
b. The principal/head of school, site coordinator or designee 
shall see that each staff member receives and understands 
proper instructions on the fire drill procedure specified for 
the room or area in which that person carries out their duties 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 5 of 15 
 
before they assume such duties. A log or sign-off list must be 
maintained at the school which documents staff receipt of 
procedures and familiarization with fire safety practices. 
c. A fire drill must be conducted quarterly (September/first 
week of school, December, March, and June) involving all 
students and staff and in accordance with Mass Fire Code, 
527 CMR 1.00: 20.2.4.2. A record of each drill is to be 
documented on the google form available in the BPS Fire & 
Safety Drill Report under Central Office Support with The BPS 
Office of Emergency Management and Preparedness (Safety 
Services). If you have any questions, please contact The BPS 
Office of Emergency Management and Preparedness.  
d. Every student in all schools shall be advised of the fire drill 
procedure and shall take part in a fire drill within three days 
after school begins in September. Fire drill procedures for 
particular rooms shall be posted within those rooms. 
Alternate and obstructed drills shall be exercised; and every 
other quarter, alternate routes shall be used. 
e. As required by Massachusetts Law, 527 CMR 1.05, 20.2.4.2.1.4, 
the head of the Fire Department, or person designated by 
them, shall visit each school four times each year for the 
purpose of quarterly inspections, reviewing Building Fire 
Safety Plans and questioning the administrators. The Fire 
Department may also conduct a fire drill for your building if 
they feel your building is not in compliance with this law. 
Drills may be conducted without advance warning to the 
school personnel other than the person in charge of the 
school at the time. 
f. Fire drill plans must ensure adequate procedures for the 
emergency evacuation of students and staff with disabilities. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 6 of 15 
 
These procedures must also be incorporated in the School 
Safety/Contingency Plan for your school building. Fire drill 
procedures must address student and staff accountability in 
an evacuation. This element of the plan should identify the 
person(s) in charge, ensure accurate class attendance rosters 
are available, and identify specific locations for evacuees to 
assemble. 
g. As required by Massachusetts Law, 527 CMR 1.05, 20.2.4.2.1.6 
Evacuation: Fire exit drills shall include the complete 
evacuation of all persons from the building. 
STORAGE OF FLAMMABLES AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
Flammables shall be stored in an approved locked metal cabinet 
suitably vented. If the amount being stored warrants, a locked 
storage vault should be provided. The storage facility must be 
under the control of a school official, with only the authorized 
personnel allowed access.  
Faculty members should not allow students to fuel individual 
devices or transport any fuel container from one location to 
another.  
All school personnel should be thoroughly instructed as to the 
hazard involved in a particular flammable liquid, chemical, or gas; 
and in its safe and proper handling prior to intended use. Material 
Safety Data sheets should be on file in the main office. No fuel 
container should be allowed to remain in any classroom but 
should be immediately returned to its permanent storage facility.  
The above procedures should be incorporated in the School 
Safety/Contingency Plan for each school building. Materials used 
in school science laboratory experiments are to be stored in 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 7 of 15 
 
compliance with related laws, codes, and ordinances. Quarterly 
school fire inspections are complemented by specialized 
inspections conducted by Boston Fire Department Special 
Occupancies’ Officers. 
*Hazardous storage areas must be secured and identified with the 
appropriate warning label. The appropriate chemical storage 
room 
door 
identification is 
the 
National Fire 
Protection 
Association’s 704 Diamond. 
*Reference Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 Student Safety / 
Health in School Shops, and / or Laboratories and Classrooms; 
and the chemical inventory sheet in Superintendent’s Circular 
FMT-7 Right to Know Law. 
REPORTING OF FIRE INCIDENTS 
The Boston Fire Prevention Code requires the following: 
a. Upon any person's discovery of a fire or smoke in a building 
or premises, they shall immediately notify the Fire Alarm 
Office of the Boston Fire Department of the location of the 
discovery and of the circumstances they have observed. The 
Boston Fire Department must be notified both by sounding 
the nearest fire alarm box (pull station) and by telephone (911 
or 617-343-2880) in the event of a fire. 
b. Any discovery or evidence of a fire or attempt to burn shall be 
reported to the Boston Fire Department by calling either 911 
or 617-343-2880 and the BPS Director of Emergency 
Management and Preparedness (857) 701-9404  to begin an 
arson investigation. BFD considers any fire started by a 
student as a potentially serious mental health issue that, if 
addressed early enough, may prevent more serious problems 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 8 of 15 
 
in the future. 
c. This section shall not be construed to forbid any person who 
discovers a fire, or the owner, lessee, person in charge of the 
building or premises, any occupant, or any of their agents, 
after notifying the Fire Department, from using all means 
necessary to extinguish or control the fire prior to the arrival 
of the Fire Department. 
d. No person shall require, make, issue, post, or maintain any 
order, direction, or regulation, written or verbal, that would 
require or direct anyone to delay reporting a fire to the Fire 
Department. 
e. All personnel must be familiar with fire reporting procedures. 
f. The Boston Fire Department and then Facilities 
Management, The Office of Emergency Management and 
Preparedness are to be notified of all fire-related incidents. 
These include but are not limited to following: 
Fire or explosion 
Good intent calls 
Overpressure rupture 
False alarm/false call 
Medical emergency 
 
 
Hazardous materials (i.e. fuel 
spills or chemical leaks) 
Hazardous conditions 
Service calls 
 
 
 
 
Fire extinguished by occupant
g. Any fire (including paper towels or tissues, even if 
extinguished), must be reported to the Boston Fire 
Department in accordance with procedure delineated in 
sections a. and b. above. 
h. The principal shall submit a written report available with 
this_link: 
https://www.mass.gov/doc/fp-200-school-fire-


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 9 of 15 
 
reporting-form/download of any fire within the school 
building or on the school grounds to BPS Director of 
Emergency Management and Preparedness, (857) 701-9404 
who will then forward it to the Boston Fire Department 
within 24 hours. This is in compliance with Mass General Law, 
Chapter 148, Sec. 2A, which went into effect September 2006.  
This information is also essential for arson prevention action.  
FIRE EXTINGUISHERS/KITCHEN SYSTEMS 
a. Portable fire extinguishers must be serviced annually and 
located in accordance with the building’s Fire Safety Plan. 
b. Kitchen extinguishing systems must be serviced twice a year. 
c. It is the responsibility of senior custodians to ensure 
extinguishers 
are 
visually 
inspected 
weekly 
and 
recharged/inspected annually to ensure they are ready for 
emergency use. 
d. Requests for fire extinguisher servicing should be made to 
Facilities Management at 617-635-9122. 
e. If extinguishers are not hanging in corridors, they must be 
readily accessible. A list of fire extinguisher locations shall be 
posted in the office and maintained in the Fire Safety section 
of your building’s School Safety/Contingency Plan. 
FLAMMABLE DECORATIONS 
a. Flammable decorations, including examples of students' 
work, must not be displayed in paths of egress, including 
doorways and stairwells.  
b. The Boston Fire Department expects us to display reasonable 
amounts of student work. This is to be in accordance with the 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 10 of 15 
 
National Fire Protection Association, Life Safety Code and 527 
CMR 20.2.4.4.3: 
“Paper materials displayed in educational use occupancies 
shall be permitted on walls only in accordance with the 
following: (1) In classrooms, paper materials displayed shall 
not exceed 20% of the total wall area. (2) Paper materials 
displayed shall be attached directly to the walls and shall not 
be permitted to cover an egress door or be placed within five 
feet of an egress door, unless approved by the AHJ. When 
determining wall areas, the door and window openings shall 
be included unless: (a) Paper materials are displayed in fully 
enclosed viewing cabinets with glass or polycarbonate 
viewing panels or covered with glass or polycarbonate sheet 
material in accordance with the Building Code; (b) Flame 
retardant paper material is used for display. (3) Paper 
material displays shall be permitted to cover up to 50% of the 
total wall area in classrooms that are fully sprinklered in 
accordance with Chapter 13.   
Corridor displays and decorations are limited to bulletin 
boards and must not cover more than 10% of the total 
corridor wall space. 
 
c. Certain buildings have more fire protection features than 
others. This may be considered when displaying student 
work. 
d. Please refer to Superintendent’s Circular FSE-03 Building 
Codes and Fire Regulations. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 11 of 15 
 
RIGHT TO KNOW – CHEMICAL INVENTORY 
Each school / facility must maintain an accurate inventory of toxic 
and hazardous substances stored and used in the building. Please 
refer to Superintendent‘s Circular FMT-07 “Right to Know” Law – 
Chemical Inventory. 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
September (First 
Week of School) 
Quarterly Fire Drill Report Due 
December  
Quarterly Fire Drill Report Due 
March  
Quarterly Fire Drill Report Due 
June  
Quarterly Fire Drill Report Due 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Emergency Management & 
Preparedness  
Department: 
Office of Emergency Management, Safety 
Services  
Mailing Address: 
205 Townsend Street Boston, MA 02121 
Phone: 
 (617) 635-6082 or (857) 701-9404 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 12 of 15 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Updated 7.31.2024) 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 13 of 15 
 
ATTACHMENT A 
SCHOOL BUILDING FIRE SAFETY PLANS 
School:                                    
Principal/Head of School:  
 
 
1. Does school have a Fire Safety Plan as part of School Safety/Contingency 
Plan? 
Y 
N 
2. Is the plan readily available in the main office? 
Y 
N 
3. (School Safety/Contingency Plan, Section 6) 
4. Is the plan current for this school year? 
Y 
N 
5. Does plan include following elements: 
a. Description of building (type, height, occupancy) 
Y 
N 
b. Types of fire protection systems (sprinkler system, standpipes) 
Y N 
c. Fire alarms (locations of pull stations, smoke detectors, heat 
detectors) 
Y 
N 
d. Location of exits (primary and alternate) 
Y  
N  
e. Evacuation routes (primary and alternate) 
Y  
N  
f. Stairwell designations 
Y  
N  
g. Smoke control (are corridor doors closed or held open by magnetic 
devices that release when an alarm is activated?) 
Y  
N   
h. Location of extinguishers 
Y  
N  
i. Identity and location of any occupants with disabilities 
Y  
N  
j. Floor plans 
Y  
N  
k. Record of staff training 
Y  
N  
l. Fire drill reports 
Y  
N  
m. Fire alarm system test records 
Y 
N 
n. Copy of building occupancy permit 
Y 
N 
o. Incident Control Team members identified by name and title with 
defined responsibilities in an emergency (including back-ups)Y 
N 
A follow-up phone call must always be made to the Fire Alarm Office 
(911 or 617-343-2880) by a designated staff member. 
p. AED device location: 
Y 
N 
 
 
Date: ________________________________________ 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 14 of 15 
 
ATTACHMENT B 
BOSTON FIRE DEPARTMENT — FIRE PREVENTION DIVISION 
SCHOOL DISPLAY MATERIALS: 527 CMR 1.05 
AREA 
WITH NO SPRINKLERS 
WITH SPRINKLERS 
 
 
 
 
 
Classroom 
20% wall coverage with 
combustible materials allowed. 
 
Nothing within 5ft. of the 
egress door. 
 
No limit if in viewing cabinet, 
covered with polycarbonate, or 
materials are flame retardant* 
50% wall coverage with 
combustible materials allowed. 
 
Nothing within 5ft. of the egress 
door. 
 
No limit if in the viewing 
cabinet, covered with 
polycarbonate, or materials are 
flame retardant.* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exit passageway, 
corridors, and 
assembly area. 
10% wall coverage with 
combustible materials allowed. 
 
Each grouping to be maximum 
of 6 ft. high and 12 ft. wide. 
 
Groups to be separated by at 
least the width of the largest 
adjacent group. 
 
No limit if in the viewing 
cabinet, covered with 
Polycarbonate, or materials are 
flame retardant. 
 
No materials within 5ft. of 
egress door. 
50% wall coverage with 
combustible materials allowed. 
 
Each grouping to be maximum 
of 6 ft. high and 12 ft. wide. 
 
Groups to be separated by at 
least ½ the width of the largest 
adjacent group. 
 
No limit if in the viewing 
cabinet, covered with 
Polycarbonate, or materials are 
flame retardant. 
 
No materials within 5ft. of 
egress door. 
Exits and enclosed 
stairs 
Nothing permitted. 
Nothing permitted. 
 
 
 
 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 15 of 15 
 
NOTES: 
 
(1) 
Door and window openings are to be included when 
calculating wall areas. 
(2) 
Documentation must show compliance with NFPA 701 or 
CA 13115 to be flame retardant. 
(3) 
Plexiglas is not allowed; the covering must be glass or 
polycarbonate. 
(4) 
The posting of exit signage or evacuation plans shall not 
be prohibited by this regulation. 
(5) 
527 CMR 1.05 shall not be applicable to any election 
materials required by law to be posted during any local, 
state, or federal election. 
 
This regulation is effective September 19, 2003. 
 
 


