Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-05 
Version 01 
 
SERVICES FOR MULTILINGUAL LEARNER STUDENTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
The Office of Multilingual and Multicultural Education has 
generated this circular to provide an overview of the operational 
and instructional expectations to effectively service the needs of 
Multilingual Learners (ML), Former English Learners FEL), and 
other subgroups within this student population. All BPS staff are 
expected to be familiar with the information contained in this 
circular and to meaningfully incorporate it into their day-to-day 
work as part of the district’s work to respect the rights of our 
students and families and comply with all related federal and 
state regulatory requirements.  
The following actions are recommended for school leaders and 
their team to review in this circular: 
1. Schedule a dialogue with members of your school’s 
Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) and Language 
Assessment Team (LATF) around the items shared in this 
document to ensure all key stakeholders are aware of their 
responsibilities.  
2. Using the LATF calendar, identify relevant information to be 
reviewed monthly by the school leader and other leaders in 
your school who can support this work.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 2 of 36 
 
3. Work with your LATF to audit your school’s scheduling data 
in Aspen SIS to assure that every EL is appropriately 
scheduled for all English Learner Education (ELE) services 
and special education services for MLs with disabilities.  
Please Note: We will use the term “Multilingual Learner” to 
describe our students who enter BPS with or who are in the 
process of learning one or more languages. However, we will 
continue to use the terms “English Learner” (EL) and “Former 
English Learner” when referring to state and federally defined 
legal rights/services. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. Overview of Policies and Legal Responsibility  
2. ELE Service Compliance Reporting 
3. English Learner Education (ELE) Program Models 
3A. District-Wide ELE Program Requirements 
3B.BPS Formally Designated Program for ELs Descriptions 
3C. Special Notices about ELE Programs in BPS 
4. ESL Services and Teacher Qualifications Compliance 
Information 
4A. ESL Instructional Time: Elementary (K2 to 5/6) and 
Secondary Grades (6-12) 
4B. ESL Instructional Types, Requirements, and 
Recommendations 
4C. ESL Instructional Grouping Requirements 
4D. Educator Licensure and Endorsement Requirements 
5. SY23-24 ESL Service Delivery Determination Guidance 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 3 of 36 
 
1. OVERVIEW OF POLICIES AND LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY 
Under Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 71A, all Boston 
Public Schools with an English Learner student assigned and 
enrolled are obligated to offer an English Learner Education (ELE) 
program. Under Massachusetts Department of Elementary and 
Secondary Education guidance, an ELE program consists of both 
Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) core content and explicit ESL 
instruction appropriate for the student’s English Language 
Development (ELD) level.  Please note that under Section 6 of this 
Chapter, “any school district employee… may be held personally 
liable” for not providing students with access to EL programming.  
The following are additional legal regulations and guidelines that 
pertain to Multilingual Learner Education offered in BPS and ELE 
service requirements for students attending BPS:   
► Resource: The DOJ Successor Settlement Agreement 
► Resource: The META Consent Decree 
► Resource: The LOOK Act 
► Resource: The BPS Systemic Improvement Plan (SIP) 
2. ELE SERVICE COMPLIANCE REPORTING 
The Office of Multilingual and Multicultural Education submits a 
series of reports each year on the compliance of Multilingual 
Learner Education offered in BPS and ELE service requirements 
for students attending BPS in accordance with the DOJ 
Successor Settlement Agreement. Described below is the 
reporting cycle of Paragraph 54, one of the key reports that 
schools are accountable for throughout the school year. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 4 of 36 
 
For each cycle of this report (October, December, and March), 
BPS reviews the following quality indicators for ELE services in 
accordance with Paragraph 54 of The  Successor’s Agreement: 
1. Teacher Qualifications: Are teachers qualified to provide 
services to ML students in their ESL and SEI or bilingual core 
content classes? 
2. ESL Instruction Type: Are ML students assigned to the right 
courses per their program code and receiving daily ESL 
services with the appropriate ESL instructional model/type 
(e.g., push in, pull out, or embedded ESL in grade-level 
English Language Arts (ELS), etc.)? 
3. ESL Minutes: Are ML students receiving the right amount of 
ESL instructional time for their ELD level? 
4. ESL Grouping: Are ML (ELD 1-5) students appropriately 
grouped for ESL? 
 
To support the district’s compliance with the 
above ELE service requirements and ensure 
the accuracy of the reporting data, schools 
are expected to review and update ELE 
service data in Aspen SIS at the beginning of 
each school year, and regularly thereafter in 
preparation for the reporting cycle deadlines 
(October, December, and March), as well as 
as needed upon changes in student enrollment or staffing 
changes. 
► Resource: Consult The Aspen SIS Guide for Recording ESL 
Minutes, Instruction Type, and Teacher (Updated Nov 2023) 
for detailed directions on entering ELE compliance data in 
Aspen. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 5 of 36 
 
► Resource: Consult The DOJ Reporting Schedule with 
Description for a full list of required DOJ reports. 
► Resource: Consult CAO-5 Cheat Sheet for a quick and simple 
outline of ESL compliance. 
► Resource: Consult K-12 Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) 
Scheduling and Service Delivery for detailed ESL scheduling 
suggestions and guidance. COMING SOON 
►  
 
3. ENGLISH LEARNER EDUCATION (ELE) PROGRAM MODELS 
3A.  District-Wide ELE Program Requirements 
Regardless of an EL student being placed in a formally 
designated program for ELs, all BPS schools must comply with 
the following requirements for ELE service: 
1. Castañeda’s Three-Pronged Test for Educationally 
Sound ELE Programs 
2. Providing an equitable curricular and educational 
experience for MLs 
3. Access to a Sheltered English Immersion Program 
Each of these three requirements are described in detail below: 
Castañeda’s Three-Pronged Test for Educationally Sound ELE 
Programs 
All ELE program models implemented in BPS are required by 
DESE to meet “Castañeda’s Three-Pronged Test,” as defined by 
the following components:   
1. The program is based on a sound educational theory or on 
research 
2. The program is implemented with adequate and 
appropriate resources 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 6 of 36 
 
3. The program has resulted in demonstrable academic 
outcomes for ELs. 
► Resource: DESE Guidance on The Integration of Castañeda’s 
Three-Pronged Test into ELE Program Development and 
Review Process 
Providing an Equitable Curricular and Educational Experience 
for MLs 
All ELE programs implemented in BPS are required to provide 
MLs (SDD 1-4) comparable access to the standard curriculum 
within a reasonable period of time and to the range and level of 
extracurricular activities and additional services as non-ML 
students. Additionally, all ELE programs should provide 
opportunities for MLs (SDD 1-4)  to take classes and participate 
in school activities with their English-proficient peers (non-MLs). 
Additionally, all BPS classrooms that serve MLs and non-MLs 
together and provide sheltered content instruction have 
historically been coded as “general education,” but will now be 
coded as State SEI classrooms to be in alignment with State 
regulations and the findings from the 2023 DESE Tiered Focus 
Monitoring report.  And students, regardless of receiving 
foundational level scores1 on the ACCESS or WIDA Screener 
assessments, have equal access to enroll in such classrooms 
where they will be exposed to English-proficient peers. 
 
Access to a Sheltered English Immersion Program 
DESE (2019) SEI guidance offers this helpful framework for the SEI 
ELE program model implemented in Massachusetts:  
 
 
 
1 Foundational level scores are scores of a 1-2.5 on the ACCESS 
test, or scores of a 1-2 on a WIDA Screener. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 7 of 36 
 
SHELTERED ENGLISH IMMERSION (SEI) PROGRAM (2) 
A two-component program model 
 
Sheltered Content Instruction 
(SCI) 
English as a Second Language 
(ESL) 
● Taught by content-area 
licensed and SEI-endorsed 
teacher (or BEE-endorsed in an 
official BPS Dual Language 
program). 
● Access to grade-level content & 
development of discipline-
specific academic language. 
● Occurs throughout the day and 
is designed for optimum EL 
engagement in content. 
 
● Taught by ESL-licensed 
teacher. 
● Additional linguistic support 
ELs need to be delivered 
through systematic, explicit, 
sustained focus on language 
and literacy in the context of 
the Massachusetts Curriculum 
Frameworks. 
● Occurs for a specific amount of 
time each day [in accordance 
with DOJ requirements 
specified in this Circular]. 
 
2Massachusetts law (G.L. c. 71A, §) defines SEI as “an English language 
acquisition process for young children in which nearly all classroom 
instruction is in English but with the curriculum and presentation designed 
for children who are learning the language. Books and instruction materials 
are in English and all reading, writing, and subject matter are taught in 
English. Although teachers may use a minimal amount of the child's native 
language, when necessary, no subject matter shall be taught in any 
language other than English, and children in this program learn to read and 
write solely in English.”  


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 8 of 36 
 
This means that ML (ELD 1-5) students with “General Education,” 
vocational, Inclusion, Substantially Separate, AWC, IB, Montessori, 
and Alternative Education program seat assignments are 
considered to be served in an SEI ELE model — entitled to both 
sheltered core content instruction and ESL.2 
3B. BPS Formally Designated Program for MLs Descriptions 
As stated in section 3A, while schools are required to comply with 
offering all ML students the requirements for ELE programs 
regardless of student placement, BPS also offers ML students 
enrollment opportunities in one of BPS’s formally designated 
programs for MLs. These program models are: 
1. Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program 
a. State SEI - Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program 
with Grade-Level English Proficient Peers 
b. BPS SEI - Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program in 
Language Specific or Multilingual 
c. Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program in 
Substantially Separate Setting 
d. Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program in High 
Intensity Literacy Training (HILT) for SLIFE Multilingual 
2. High Intensity Literacy Training (HILT) for SLIFE Language 
Specific 
3. Dual Language Education (DLE) or Two-Way Immersion 
Program 
4. Newcomer Program 
 
Please Note: Schools are expected to implement the ELE 
program model designated for their school. Any deviation from 
the models outlined in this section must be approved by the 
Office of Multilingual and Multicultural Education (OMME) so as 
not to constitute a violation of the student/parent rights.   
 
The specifics of each program model is described below: 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 9 of 36 
 
Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program3  
As described in section 3A, a Sheltered English Immersion 
Program is a two component program. First, it  incorporates 
strategies to make content area instruction more 
understandable to MLs and to promote English language 
development in core-content classes throughout the day taught 
by SEI (or BEE as appropriate) endorsed teachers. Content area 
instruction integrates sheltering strategies to make content 
comprehensive and develop content area academic language in 
mathematics, English language arts (ELA), social studies, and/or 
science. As the second component to a Sheltered English 
Immersion program, English learner students also receive explicit 
English as a Second Language classes. 
 
Boston Public Schools offers various ways for English learner 
students to access a Sheltered English Immersion program as 
outlined below: 
  
State SEI - Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program with 
Grade-Level English Proficient Peers 
SEI with grade-level English proficient peers offers MLs both 
Sheltered Content Instruction from SEI endorsed teachers 
as well as explicit English as a Second Language classes. 
MLs in this SEI program type are not grouped according to 
their EL status, their first language, or their level of English 
proficiency in any way during core-content classes. They 
 
3 Massachusetts law  (G.L. c. 71A, §2) defines SEI as “an English 
language acquisition process for young children in which nearly 
all classroom instruction is in English but with the curriculum and 
presentation designed for children who are learning the 
language. Books and instruction materials are in English and all 
reading, writing, and subject matter are taught in English. 
Although teachers may use a minimal amount of the child's 
native language when necessary, no subject matter shall be 
taught in any language other than English, and children in this 
program learn to read and write solely in English.”  


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 10 of 36 
 
receive core-content instruction with English proficient 
peers as well as other MLs. Only during English as a Second 
Language classes are MLs in this SEI program type 
separated from their grade-level English proficient peers 
and  grouped according to their ESL Service Delivery 
Determination (SDD).  
 
BPS SEI - Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program in 
Language Specific or Multilingual 
This is a BPS ELE program that incorporates English 
language development throughout the day with strategies 
to make core academic content instruction more 
comprehensible to MLs who are ELD 1-2.5 (scored 1-2.5 on 
WIDA ACCESS Overall score). BPS SEI Language Specific 
programs serve students who all speak the same first 
language; in BPS SEI Multilingual programs, a variety of 
languages are spoken by the students. Instruction is 
conducted in English, with native language clarification for 
students where available. ML Students in an SEI Language 
Specific or SEI Multilingual Classroom in Grades K2-5/6 
receive ESL instruction within their classroom; for sheltered 
content instruction they may be scheduled with English 
Proficient Peers for a portion of their day. Students in SEI 
Language Specific or Multilingual classrooms receive 
instruction in smaller class sizes in comparison to General 
Education classrooms. BPS SEI Language Specific or 
Multilingual programs in at the elementary level, English 
learner students may receive their English as a Second 
Language instruction embedded within the content 
instruction of the class if the homeroom teacher possesses 
their ESL license. For BPS SEI Language Specific or 
Multilingual programs at the secondary level, English 
learner students must receive their English as a Second 
Language instruction in a standalone setting from an 
appropriately licensed teacher. 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 11 of 36 
 
Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program in Substantially 
Separate Setting 
Per the Individualized Education Plan (IEP) and/or 504 plan, 
MLs in this SEI program type will receive core-content 
instruction and ESL services in a self-contained special 
education classroom with specialized instruction 
throughout their day within a small-group structured 
setting. Research-based practices, specific to disability, are 
utilized in the specialized classroom. MLs will continue to 
receive sheltered content instruction where SEI-endorsed, 
content-licensed educators shelter instruction so that they 
can meaningfully engage with grade-level content, and 
develop discipline-specific academic language.Depending 
on the nature of an MLs disability in this program, they may 
have modifications to their ESL services specified in their IEP 
and/or 504 plan.  
 
Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program in High Intensity 
Literacy Training (HILT) for SLIFE Multilingual 
In SLIFE multilingual classrooms, the language of 
instruction is English, and teachers provide native language 
support when feasible. All students in this classroom are EL 
students who enter BPS with Limited or Interrupted Formal 
Education (SLIFE); students in the classroom may speak 
different native languages. Students in SLIFE classrooms 
receive instruction from an ESL teacher as well as content 
and literacy from a teacher(s) who is qualified to provide 
sheltered content instruction. Please also see general HILT 
for SLIFE requirements here.  
 
High Intensity Literacy Training (HILT) for SLIFE Language 
Specific 
In language specific HILT for SLIFE programs, MLs receive High 
Intensity Literacy Training (HILT) in their native language. This 
program enrolls EL students who enter BPS with Limited or 
Interrupted Formal Education (SLIFE) who all speak the same 
language. Core academic content is taught in the native 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 12 of 36 
 
language of the student, and is increasingly taught in English as 
the student develops English fluency. Students in SLIFE 
classrooms receive instruction from an ESL teacher as well as 
content and literacy from a Native Literacy/Content teacher(s) 
who is qualified to provide sheltered content instruction. SLIFE 
Native Literacy classrooms have smaller class sizes than State SEI, 
BPS SEI, and Dual Language programs. 
 
General HILT for SLIFE Program Requirements 
BPS recommends this program for MLs ages 8 or older who 
are newcomers to the United States, who have little to no 
literacy in their native language, or whose formal schooling 
was limited or interrupted in their native country. Students 
in HILT for SLIFE programs are grouped across a grade span 
(3-4, 3-5, 5-6, 6-8, 7-8, 9-12) and receive intensive academic 
English language and literacy development, native 
language instruction designed to help them learn reading, 
writing, math, science, and history/social studies, when 
available, and additional classes such as technology, arts, 
and physical education. 
 
In accordance with the META Consent Decree, HILT for 
SLIFE programs must also comply with the following 
requirements: 
 
1) Class size should not exceed 15 students; 
2) During related arts / specials / electives courses, lunch, 
recess, and allotted intervention time, SLIFE students 
must be integrated with other ML students and with 
English-proficient students (Never ELs, Former ELs), 
who serve as peer language models.   
3) “Daily Common Planning Time” must be allocated for 
ESL teachers and Native Language Teachers for age 
and grade-appropriate lesson design and materials 
development. 
4) In language-specific programs such as Spanish, Haitian 
Creole, and Cabo Verdean Creole, students must 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 13 of 36 
 
receive Native Language High-Intensity Literacy 
Training (HILT) as they develop literacy in their native 
language as well as English. 
5) In SLIFE multilingual classrooms, teachers must 
provide native language supports when feasible. 
6) All SLIFE students at the beginning of every year or 
upon assignment to the program must have a HILT for 
SLIFE Individual Learning Plan (ILP) generated that 
qualifies the individual learning targets for the 
academic year. This HILT for SLIFE ILP must be 
completed in full to document progress and determine 
a student's eligibility to exit the program. 
7) No student can be recommended to exit the HILT for 
SLIFE program without meeting the exit criteria as per 
the META Consent Decree. 
 
Dual Language: Two-Way Immersion Programs 
In this program, the classroom is made up of both native 
language and English dominant students. All students learn to 
read, write, speak, and understand both languages either 
through core academic content instruction or explicit language 
instruction, taught by qualified teachers in the two languages. 
The goal of these programs is for students to become bilingual 
and biliterate. BPS seeks to increase more dual-language 
opportunities such as two-way immersion programs, heritage 
language programs, and ethnic studies courses in students’ 
native language. Programs are currently offered in Spanish, 
Haitian Creole, ASL, Vietnamese, and Cape Verdean Creole.  
 
Newcomer Program 
This program is available for secondary MLs at the early stages of 
their English language development. Only MLs who are ELD 1-2.5 
(scored 1-2.5 on WIDA ACCESS Overall score) are eligible for this 
program. Instruction is conducted in English, with native 
language clarification for students where available. English 
learner students in this program receive ESL instruction in a 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 14 of 36 
 
standalone period and sheltered content instruction from core-
content teachers. 
o  
 
3C.  Special Notices about ELE Programs in BPS 
Multilingual Learners with Disabilities 
Multilingual Learners with Disabilities (MLWD) are Multilingual 
Learners who receive disability-related, specialized instruction in 
an inclusion setting, resource room setting, or a substantially 
separate Special Education classroom. Regardless of placement, 
BPS is obligated to provide Multilingual Learners with Disabilities 
(MLWD) with equal access to the same opportunities as other 
students; education, specialized instruction and related services, 
appropriate and effective ESL and content instruction by 
accessing grade-level curriculum while providing 
accommodations, modifications, and goals within the Individual 
Education Plan (IEP). Schools are required to monitor students’ 
progress to ensure appropriate progress toward meeting their 
English language proficiency benchmarks and IEP goals. 
All MLWD (ELD1-5) are entitled to receive both Special Education 
(SPED) and ELE services in a manner appropriate to the student’s 
individual needs by appropriately qualified staff; the District is 
required to provide these services. No ML shall be denied ELE 
services solely due to the nature or severity of the student’s 
disability, and no ML shall be denied SPED services due to their 
ML status. This means, for example: 
● No modifications to ESL service requirements may be 
implemented unless such modifications are determined 
necessary by the student’s IEP or Section 504 team, through 
a documented team process, and in accordance with the 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 15 of 36 
 
narrow exceptions contained in Paragraph 67 of the 
Successor Settlement Agreement.  
● Any approved modification to ESL minutes, grouping, 
and/or instruction must be reflected on the EL Grid, an 
internal monitoring section in EdPlan, and will be reviewed 
by the BPS Office of Special Education/Office of Multilingual 
and Multicultural Education Supervisor(s) of Multilingual 
Learners with Disabilities. 
● ESL may not take the place of a student’s special education 
services. For instance, a student may not be taken out of 
speech therapy or counseling in order to get ESL. 
● Core content instruction and ESL services must be provided 
with all accommodations as outlined in the student’s 504 
plan or IEP. 
Parent Right to Opt Out of the ELE Program 
Parents / guardians have the right to opt out their child from 
some or all components of the district’s ELE program pursuant to 
Paragraphs 33 to 35 of the Successor Agreement. The district 
shall approve a parent’s request to opt out of some or all ELE 
services, only by following the relevant safeguards that are set in 
place: 
1. The decision to opt out must be voluntary and informed, 
and not the product of district practices or influence, the 
result of inadequate or inaccurate information, or 
inadequate district resources. 
2. If any parent/guardian of an EL communicates a refusal to 
have their child enrolled in an EL program, and/or refuses 
all or only specific ELE services (e.g., EL-only SEI classes, 
language-specific SEI classes, or HILT classes) at a 
Welcome Center, NACC, or school, then a meeting will be 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 16 of 36 
 
convened with a representative from OMME, the school 
leader, a representative of the LAT (typically the LAT-F), 
and the parent(s)/guardian(s) to explain the benefits of 
services and address parent concerns AND encourage 
parents to allow their child to receive ELE services for at 
least 30 days before deciding to refuse such services. 
3. If the parent continues to refuse ELE services after an 
explanation of the benefits of the services, the Opt-Out 
form (documenting 1. Evidence of parent meeting and 2. 
Parent request) must be submitted to OMME for review 
and approval and such documentation must 
subsequently by submitted by OMME to the DOJ/OCR. 
4. Students approved as “opt-outs” are still required to 
remain coded as an English Learner, required to 
participate in ACCESS, scheduled with an SEI-endorsed 
teacher(s) for core content, and have their English 
language development monitored by the school. 
5. Parents or legal guardians should revisit their decision to 
opt out every year and submit a new request for the 
current academic year and parents may request to 
restore ELE services at any point. 
Former English Learners 
Upon exit (reclassification to Former EL status), schools must 
regularly monitor students’ academic progress for 4 school years 
upon their reclassification as is required by DESE and federal 
regulations. It is recommended that schools continue to schedule 
Former ELs with an SEI-endorsed content teacher(s) during their 
monitoring period. If during this monitoring period it is 
determined that the student’s EL status be restored (with ELE 
services provided), the LATF must seek written permission from 
the student’s parent/guardian. 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 17 of 36 
 
Please see: 
o Section 5 of this circular for additional information on 
the exit criteria for ELs 
 
4. ESL SERVICES AND TEACHER QUALIFICATIONS COMPLIANCE 
INFORMATION 
Under the terms of the Department of Justice Successor 
Agreement and the policies of the Department of Elementary 
and Secondary Education, all BPS Multilingual Learner Education 
Programs must comply with specific guidelines regarding ESL 
Instructional Minutes, Instructional Type, Instructional Grouping, 
and Educator Licensure and Endorsement. The following section 
outlines the specifics of each compliance measure as applicable 
for each Multilingual / English Learner Education Program 
described section 3.  
Note: Schools are advised to create their schedule for ELE 
services first to ensure that the necessary qualified staff are 
scheduled to meet ML service needs. 
All ML students, including Multilingual Learners with Disabilities 
(MLWD) and Students with Limited or Interrupted Formal 
Education (SLIFE), must be scheduled for the requisite amount of 
daily ESL instruction according to their SDD and must receive 
ESL by an ESL licensed teacher. MLWD with severe disabilities for 
whom compliant ESL instruction as described in the Successor’s 
Agreement is not appropriate may have their services adjusted if 
reflected and recorded appropriately in the IEP through a team 
process. 
 
 
 
 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 18 of 36 
 
4A. ESL Instructional Time: Elementary (K2 to 5/6) and 
Secondary Grades (6-12) 
Elementary (K2 to 5/6) 
Consistent with DESE’s guidance, the table below provides the 
DOJ-approved ESL instructional time per ELD level that the 
district shall provide, to the extent practicable: 
TABLE 2: MINIMUM REQUISITE ESL INSTRUCTIONAL TIME  
FOR MLS IN K2-5/6 
ELD 
Level 
Daily ESL 
Instructional Time 
Weekly ESL Instructional 
Time 
ELD 1 
135 minutes (2 hours, 
15 minutes) 
675 minutes (11 hours, 15 
minutes) 
ELD 2 
90 minutes (1 hour, 30 
minutes) 
450 minutes (7 hours, 30 
minutes) 
ELD 3 
60 minutes (1 hour) 
300 minutes (5 hours) 
ELD 4 
45 minutes 
225 minutes (3 hours, 45 
minutes) 
ELD 5 
45 minutes 
225 minutes (3 hours, 45 
minutes) 
 
Secondary Grades (6-12) 
In order to address the variety of scheduling at our Secondary 
Schools as well as to ensure that students can equitably access 
ESL along with other MassCore / graduation requirements and 
specialty courses (e.g Advanced Placement courses, Dual 
Enrollment, Early College, and any vocational or technical 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 19 of 36 
 
training / courses), OMME has shifted from a “minutes” 
framework at the Secondary level to a “blocks required” 
framework. 
TABLE 3: SECONDARY SCHOOL ESL SCHEDULING* 
School’s Daily 
Course Block 
Length 
(Minutes) 
# of Daily ESL Blocks Required: 
 
ELD 1 
ELD 2 
ELD 3 
ELD 4/5** 
45-59 minutes 
3 
2 
1 
1 
60-74 minutes 
2 
2 
1 
1 
75+ minutes 
2 
1 
1 
1 
*ESL for ELD 4-5 may be embedded into the ELA block by an ESL-
licensed teacher. This is only allowable for ELD levels 4 and 5. 
 
Please note:  
● Schools may leverage this framework, but may still opt to 
schedule ESL instruction based on the daily minutes 
specified in Table 2. 
● OMME recommends schools consider scheduling MLs for 
additional support from an ESL licensed teacher during 
Targeted Advisory / Intervention / WIN / SEL blocks (if 
available) based on the needs of their students and in the 
balance of other opportunities for students to access grade-
level core content, advanced learning, and specials 
alongside their English-proficient peers. Refer to the 
resource below for sample recommended schedules.  


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 20 of 36 
 
● Part-time students (i.e., those attending for 1 or 2 remaining 
credit requirements) who have fulfilled MassCore ELA 
graduation requirements, and / or are only enrolled in BPS 
for credit recovery or only online education (i.e., never 
physically at a school building), will not be required to be 
scheduled for ESL. These students are typically over-age 
students who are balancing work and other adult 
responsibilities. OMME highly recommends that these 
students have a direct connection with the Re-Engagement 
Center and have a dedicated counselor that can assist them 
in creating an educational pathway that works best for their 
home, family, and work obligations. Note: Schools may 
schedule these students for ESL if it will best support the 
student in meeting graduation requirements and their 
individual needs. Regardless, schools should still be 
scheduling these students for core content classes with an 
appropriately endorsed (SEI and/or Bilingual Endorsement) 
or ESL certified teacher. 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 21 of 36 
 
4B. ESL Instructional Types, Requirements, and 
Recommendations 
All requisite ESL Instruction must occur during an ESL-Eligible 
course as designated by the BPS course catalog (e.g. reading, 
writing, ELA, literacy / humanities). This is to ensure that ELs still 
have equitable access to other grade-level core content and 
specialty courses.  
Refer to the following tables for allowable types of ESL 
instructional models. 
 
TABLE 4: ESL INSTRUCTIONAL MODELS FOR MLS IN K2-5/6 
All instructional models require an ESL licensed teacher during 
the literacy/humanities block). 
Standalone ESL — For ELs in Gen Ed 
 A standalone section is a scheduled class for ESL students 
with an ESL licensed teacher. The student is not pulled out 
of classrooms to attend this class, it is a part of their student 
schedule (e.g., with an “ESL” course title). An ESL licensed 
teacher must be the teacher of record of this classroom. 
Standalone ESL is the recommended instructional model for 
ML students with an ELD of 1-3 in grades K2-5 who are not 
assigned to an SEI language-specific or SEI Multilingual 
program. 
For ELD 4-5: Standalone is an allowable option; however, 
refer to the Embed ELA model as an alternative if the 
ELA/homeroom teacher is ESL licensed.  
 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 22 of 36 
 
Push-In ESL 
Push-In ESL may be provided to ML students in Elementary 
grades (K2 to 5) when the ESL teacher is coming into an 
ELA/Humanities course (or via a co-teacher in the 
classroom) to provide ESL services for a specific, small group 
of students within the same classroom while other students 
continue to receive content instruction. Schools must 
adhere to ESL grouping requirements when utilizing this 
instructional method.  
At a minimum, weekly common planning time for the ESL 
and classroom teachers should be provided. 
Pull-Out ESL 
Pull-Out ESL may be provided to ML students in Elementary 
grades (K2 to 5) when a student is being taken out of an ELA 
/ Humanities course to receive ESL instruction. Schools must 
adhere to ESL grouping requirements when utilizing this 
instructional method.  
Embed Homeroom — ESL in formal SEI programs  
This is an instructional type allowable ONLY for ML students 
(ELD 1-3) in SEI language-specific or SEI multilingual 
programs at the Elementary grade level (K2 to 5/6). 
Please see section 5 of this circular for additional 
information on the criteria for a BPS SEI eligible ELD 3. 
In this model, students receive ESL instruction embedded 
during their literacy time (course titles: Reading and 
Writing). Teachers providing this embedded ESL instruction 
must be ESL licensed and are required to complete OMME 
designated PD on differentiation and lesson planning. 


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 23 of 36 
 
Embed ELA — ESL  
For ML students with ELD levels 4 and 5 only, the 
recommended instructional model for ESL is for ESL to be 
embedded in core ELA or literacy courses, only by an ESL 
licensed teacher. Students at these ELD levels may be 
grouped together. 
 
 
Inclusion Teacher ESL Stipend per BTU CBA 
For special education inclusion classrooms only that utilize a 1.0 
teacher model, where the teacher is using 3 licenses (two of 
which are special education and ESL), this ESL-licensed teacher 
of record may agree to be stipended (45 minutes per day at the 
BTU contractual hourly rate) to provide ESL instruction for ELD 4-
5 students that is embedded into the ELA or literacy block (ESL 
Embed ELA). Alternatively, if the teacher does not agree to the 
stipend, ESL instruction for ELD 4-5 students must be provided 
by a separate ESL licensed teacher. All ML (ELD 1-5) students are 
entitled to receive ESL services regardless of the teacher/stipend 
model. 
 
 
 


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 24 of 36 
 
TABLE 5: TYPES OF ESL INSTRUCTIONAL MODELS FOR MLS IN 
GRADES 6-12 
ESL 
Instruction 
Type 
Description (all instructional models require  
an ESL licensed teacher) 
Standalone 
ESL 
 
● For ELD levels 1 to 3, this is the only 
compliant instructional model for ESL service 
delivery for students. 
● Standalone is an allowable option for which 
ELD 4-5 students may be grouped together; 
however, refer to the Embed ELA mode 
below as the recommended instructional 
type if the ELA teacher is ESL licensed.  
Embed ELA 
ESL in English 
Language Arts  
● For ML students with ELD levels 4 and 5 only, 
the recommended instructional model for 
ESL is for ESL to be embedded in core ELA or 
literacy courses, only by an ESL licensed 
teacher. Students at these ELD levels may be 
grouped together. 
 
 
 


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 25 of 36 
 
4C. ESL Instructional Grouping Requirements 
The following table represents allowable groupings of students 
for ESL instruction. 
TABLE 6: ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY ESL GROUPING 
ACROSS ELD AND GRADE LEVELS 
ELD Levels 
Elementary Grades  
K2 to 5/6 
Secondary Grades  
6/7 to 12 
ELD 1 
● With fellow ELD 1 only 
across two consecutive 
grades; OR 
● With ELD 2 in one grade 
level 
● With fellow ELD 1 across 
multiple grades; OR 
● With ELD 2 only in one 
grade level 
ELD 2 
● With ELD 1 in one grade 
level; OR 
● With fellow ELD 2 only, in 
one grade level or across 
up to two consecutive 
grades; OR 
● With ELD 3 only in one 
grade level 
● With fellow ELD 2 only 
across multiple grades; 
OR 
● With ELD 1 only in one 
grade level; OR 
● With ELD 3 only in one 
grade level 
ELD 3  
● With ELD 2 in one grade 
level, preferably ELD 2.5-
2.9; OR 
● With fellow ELD 3 only, in 
one grade level or across 
up to two consecutive 
grades; OR 
● With ELD 2 in one grade 
level, preferably ELD 2.5-
2.9; OR 
● With fellow ELD 3 only 
across multiple grades, 
preferably two 
consecutive grade levels 
(e.g., in grades 9-10); OR 


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 26 of 36 
 
ELD Levels 
Elementary Grades  
K2 to 5/6 
Secondary Grades  
6/7 to 12 
● With ELD 4 in one grade 
level 
● With ELD 4, in one grade 
level in a standalone 
setting 
ELD 4 
● With ELD 3 in one grade 
level; OR 
● With ELD 5 in one grade 
level; OR 
● With fellow ELD 4 only 
across two consecutive 
grades 
● With ELD 3 in one grade 
level in a standalone 
setting; OR 
● With ELD 5 in one grade 
level; OR 
● With fellow ELD 4 only 
across multiple grades 
ELD 5 
● With ELD 4 in one grade 
level; OR 
● With fellow ELD 5 only 
across two consecutive 
grades 
● With ELD 4 in one grade 
level; OR 
● With fellow ELD 5 only 
across multiple grades 
Allowable Exceptions: 
SEI Language 
Specific or 
Multilingual 
Program (ELD 
1-3) 
● ELD 1-3 of the same SEI 
program homeroom may 
be grouped together for 
ESL instruction* 
● This grouping is not 
allowable at the 
secondary level. 
HILT for SLIFE 
● ELs, regardless of ELD 
level or grade level, in the 
same HILT for SLIFE 
● ELs, regardless of ELD 
level or grade level, in the 
same HILT for SLIFE 


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 27 of 36 
 
ELD Levels 
Elementary Grades  
K2 to 5/6 
Secondary Grades  
6/7 to 12 
Programs (4) 
program homeroom may 
be grouped together for 
ESL instruction. 
program homeroom may 
be grouped together for 
ESL instruction. 
MLWD (with 
approved ESL 
modifications) 
● Refer to the ELSWD ESL 
Modifications section for 
guidance. 
● Refer to the ELSWD ESL 
Modifications section for 
guidance. 
*Subject to the terms of DOJ Paragraph 39e. 
 
 
 
 
4() The META Consent Decree defines BPS HILT for SLIFE 
programs as “self-contained, ungraded, elementary format 
classroom with two teachers [Native Literacy Content teacher 
and ESL teacher] responsible for all instruction.” Students in the 
program are typically ELD 1 but may be at an ELD 2 level as they 
progress in their English language acquisition until meeting the 
exit criteria required by the consent decree. Therefore, students 
in this program model may receive ESL grouped in this manner. 


Page 28:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 28 of 36 
 
4D. Educator Licensure and Endorsement Requirements 
Please Note: 
Per DESE (603 CMR 14.07 (3)), no EL student can be placed in 
classrooms where the teachers lack the SEI Endorsement for two 
or more consecutive years. (5)  
● School Leaders are to keep detailed electronic records of all 
teachers who are in the process of obtaining the SEI or 
Bilingual Education Endorsement and the pathway that 
they are pursuing to meet this obligation. All ML (ELD 1-5) 
must be assigned to core content (and vocational, if 
applicable) classrooms where the teachers are already 
endorsed or in a confirmed pathway.  
● When creating schedules, schools must take into 
consideration teachers who are newly hired and who are 
returning but lack the SEI endorsement.  
● It is recommended that students who have reclassified to 
Former English Learner status be scheduled with SEI-
endorsed teachers for their core content courses, especially 
at the start of their 4-year monitoring period. 
● For any SEI Language-Specific / Multilingual elementary 
teacher to provide embed HR ESL to students at ELD 1-3, 
they must have both an ESL license and have completed 
OMME-approved training on differentiation of ESL and 
lesson planning, as part of the qualifications for this 
program, to ensure that the unique needs of students at 
ELD levels 1-3 are met (DOJ Paragraph 39e). Please also 
reference the 2018-2021 BTU Collective Bargaining 
 
5The teacher in this instance would also be required to get the SEI 
endorsement. 


Page 29:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 29 of 36 
 
Agreement (p. 49 section 11) as it pertains to this 
requirement. Teachers are expected to complete this 
training by the end of the school year. If the teacher has not 
satisfied these requirements, the school must ensure an ESL 
licensed teacher is scheduled to deliver the appropriate 
English language development instruction to ML students 
for the literacy portion of the day.  
The following table outlines DESE educator licensure and 
endorsement requirements in order to instruct ML (ELD 1-5) 
students by job type. 
 
 


Page 30:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 30 of 36 
 
TABLE 7: TEACHER QUALIFICATION BY JOB TYPE 
Job Type 
Required 
Qualification 
Additional Information 
ESL 
Teacher 
ESL License 
Individuals who have completed and passed all 
requisite coursework / requirements and are 
only waiting for the state to administratively 
grant the ESL license may also be assigned to 
teach ESL. 
Core 
Content or 
Vocational 
Teacher 
(English) 
SEI 
Endorsement 
(Teacher) 
 
Core Content Teachers: 
● teachers of students with moderate or 
severe disabilities; subject-area teachers in 
English, reading or language arts; 
mathematics, science; civics and 
government, economics, history, and 
geography and early childhood and 
elementary teachers who teach such 
content.  
Vocational (CVTE) Teachers: 
● For purposes of SEI, CVTE is defined as 
programs approved under M.G.L. c. 74; 
programs that meet the definition of career 
and technical education listed in the Carl D. 
Perkins Career and Technical Education 
Improvement Act of 2006, 20 U.S.C. § 2302(5); 
and any other programs that may be 
designated by the DESE Commissioner such 
as automotive technology, carpentry, 
culinary arts, engineering, exploratory, 
masonry, information technology, and any 
other subjects listed by DESE. 


Page 31:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 31 of 36 
 
Core 
Content or 
Vocational 
Teacher 
(Native / 
Partner 
Language) 
BEE 
Endorsement 
Core Content and CVTE Teachers as defined 
above who: 
● Instruct in the partner language of a formal 
BPS dual language program 
● Instruct in the partner language of a formal 
language specific HILT for SLIFE program 
 
Evaluator 
of ML 
Teacher 
(English) 
SEI 
Endorsement 
(Administrator 
or Teacher) 
A principal, assistant principal, supervisor, or 
director ("administrator") who supervises or 
evaluates one or more core academic teachers 
of ML (ELD 1-5) students 
Evaluator 
of ML 
Teacher 
(Native / 
Partner 
Language) 
BEE 
Endorsement 
 
OR 
 
SEI 
Endorsement 
(Administrator 
or Teacher) 
Evaluators as defined above who supervise a 
core academic teacher assigned to provide 
instruction to an English Learner in a bilingual 
ELE program 
Substitute 
Teachers 
N/A 
If for any ESL or core content class, no teacher 
is available who meets the qualifications to 
instruct ML (ELD 1-5) students, school leaders 
shall, to the extent practicable, assign 
substitute teachers who are ESL-licensed for 
ESL instruction or who are SEI or Bilingual 
Education-endorsed (for core content classes).  
 
The following table outlines DESE educator licensure and 
endorsement requirements in order to instruct ML (ELD 1-5) 
students by BPS ELE program model. 


Page 32:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 32 of 36 
 
TABLE 8: EXAMPLES OF LICENSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
POSITIONS SERVING EL STUDENTS* 
Program 
BPS 
Teacher 
Title 
Position 
Description 
Required 
Licensure 
Preferred 
 
 
 
 
BPS SEI 
SEI Multi-
lingual 
General ed. 
position in a 
classroom that 
includes students 
with ELD levels 1-
3 and varying 
native languages 
Content area 
license & SEI 
endorsement 
ESL License 
and SEI PD  
SEI + 
[Specific 
Language] 
e.g. SEI 
Spanish 
General ed. 
position in a 
classroom that 
includes students 
with ELD levels 1-
3 of the same 
native language 
Content area 
license & SEI 
endorsement 
ESL 
License, SEI 
PD, and 
Oral fluency 
in students’ 
primary 
language 
ESL 
ESL 
Teacher 
(incl. SLIFE 
ESL) 
Provides ESL 
instruction only 
(regardless of ELE 
program model) 
ESL license 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bilingual 
Two-Way + 
[Specific 
Language] 
e.g., 
Bilingual 
Serves multiple 
classrooms to 
provide periods of 
instruction in a 
language other 
than English 
Content area 
license & Bilingual 
Education 
Endorsement (if 
teaching in native 
language)  
 


Page 33:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 33 of 36 
 
Dual 
Lang-
uage/ 
Two-way 
Two-Way 
Spanish 
(complementary 
position below) 
(Note: if the 
teacher is 
providing ESL, the 
teacher must have 
the ESL License) 
Bilingual 
Two-Way 
English 
Serves multiple 
classrooms to 
provide periods of 
English 
instruction to 
students 
(complementary 
position above) 
Content area 
license & either SEI 
Endorsement or 
Bilingual 
Education 
Endorsement 
(Note: if the 
teacher is 
providing ESL, the 
teacher must have 
the ESL License) 
 
 
SLIFE 
SLIFE 
Native 
Literacy 
(TBE) 
teacher 
Provides core 
content 
instruction to 
SLIFE students in 
the student’s 
native language 
(language other 
than English) 
A Core Content 
area license & 
Bilingual 
Education 
Endorsement  
 
5. SY23-24 ELD AND ELP LEVELING GUIDANCE 
For the 2023-2024 school year, the Office of Multilingual and 
Multicultural Education is continuing the transition of 
Multilingual Learner students’ English Language Development 
Level (ELD Level) to Multilingual Learner students’ English 
Language Proficiency Level (ELP Level). This shift aligns all 


Page 34:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 34 of 36 
 
students’ ELP levels with their WIDA ACCESS 2.0 scores and 
aligns our guidance and policies for Multilingual Learner students 
and Multilingual Learner Education with the guidance and 
policies of the Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education. The following table shows the updated ACCESS and 
Alt ACCESS score to ELP level crosswalk. 
TABLE 9: ACCESS SCORE CROSSWALK 
2022 ACCESS and Alt ACCESS 
Score Range  
 
SY 23-24 English Language 
Development (ELD) / English 
Language Proficiency (ELP) 
Levels 
ACCESS: 1.0 - 1.9 / ACCESS Alt: A1-P1 
Level 1 (Foundational)  
ACCESS: 2.0-2.9 / ACCESS Alt: P2 
Level 2 (Foundational)  
ACCESS: 3.0-3.4 / ACCESS Alt: P3 
Level 3  (Foundational)  
ACCESS: 3.5-3.9 / ACCESS Alt: P3 
Level 3 (Transitional)  
ACCESS: 4.0 - 4.9 
Level 4 (Transitional)  
ACCESS: 5.0-5.9 
Level 5 (Transitional)  
ACCESS: 4.2 with 3.9 literacy  
(i.e., meets state exit criteria) 
Former EL 
 
Please note: 
● Annual program placement recommendations are based on 
students’ ELP level, and OMME will assume the 
responsibility of using the annual program notification form 
to notify parents of program placement. 


Page 35:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 35 of 36 
 
● Consecutive year ELD 3 students will be automatically 
exited from BPS SEI Language Specific or Multilingual 
program placement if they currently occupy such a seat. 
○ Per DOJ, consecutive year ELD 3 students may not be 
grouped together with ELD 1-2 students for their ESL 
instruction. 
● Transitional ELD 3 students (students who received an 
ACCESS overall score of 3.5-3.9) will be automatically exited 
from BPS SEI Language Specific or Multilingual program 
placement if they currently occupy such a seat. 
● Students who scored lower on their ACCESS test than their 
previous ELD level will be held harmless. 
● Students who did not take the ACCESS or complete ACCESS 
due to absence or other circumstance will retain their 
previous ELD level. 
● Students who did not take all domains of ACCESS due to an 
SPD code will receive their appropriate levels and program 
placements according to the policies listed above upon 
release of their ACCESS overall score by the state in early fall. 
► Resource: End of Year Leveling Guidance 22-23 
 
 
 
 


Page 36:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 36 of 36 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Linda Chen, Senior Deputy Superintendent of 
Academics and Interim Assistant 
Superintendent of OMME 
Department: 
Office of Multilingual and Multicultural 
Education (OMME) 
Mailing Address: Bolling Building, 2300 Washington Street, 6th 
Floor, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9435 
Email: 
OMMEequityteam@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-25 
DATE: 
Version 01 
 
GUIDELINES FOR INTERNATIONAL FIELD TRIPS  
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
IMPORTANT NOTE: *These guidelines might be impacted by 
COVID-19 restrictions and are subject to change based on public 
health, international security, or other emergent issues that 
could impact travel. For the most up-to-date information and 
guidance, contact the Department of Global Education 
(kdorseytwumasi2@bostonpublicschools.org) for 
assistance/guidance.  
This Superintendent’s Circular provides instructions for 
implementing the Field Trip Policy passed by the Boston School 
Committee on November 20, 2019. 
● This circular should be read AFTER the Superintendent’s 
Circular CAO-22, General Guidelines and Procedures for All 
Field Trips, as additional guidelines are outlined there. 
● The principal/head of school (and/or the district 
department lead sponsoring the trip) are responsible for 
ensuring that all field trip policies and procedures as 
outlined in this circular and others are adhered to. 
● As soon as a trip opportunity becomes known, contact the 
Department of Global Education for support throughout 
the planning process. The principal/head of school (and/or 


Page 2:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 2 of 104 
the district department sponsoring the trip) and the 
program leader (lead chaperone) must review and 
complete checklists for this circular throughout the 
planning process. Signed checklists must be kept on file at 
the school. 
PLANNING PROCESS 
International Field Trip Program: An international field trip 
program is any trip off school grounds that involves travel to a 
location outside of the United States. International field trips 
must be planned at least a year in advance to maximize 
affordability and fundraising efforts, and when possible, 
scheduled during non-school time (i.e., school vacations, and 
summer). NEW: BPS international field trip programs require 
execution by a reputable travel vendor and will require a vetting 
process by the Department of Global Education and BPS legal.   
Travel to ‘U. S. Territories, including Puerto Rico, the United States 
Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and Northern Mariana 
Islands are covered under international travel insurance. Travel to 
these territories is subject to some forms and requirements in the 
CAO-25 International Field Trip guidelines, but only require 
Principal/Head of School approval. Consult with the Department 
of Global Education for required forms for these destinations. 
APPROVAL PROCESS  
• STEP 1: Interest Form & Consultation:  
As soon as a trip opportunity becomes known, or there is 
interest in an international travel program, teachers must 
complete an Interest Form from the Department of Global 
Education, and inform their principal/head of school. 


Page 3:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 3 of 104 
Contact the Department of Global Education for support 
and guidance with the CAO-25 application, and throughout 
the planning process. No arrangements should be made, 
meetings held, payments, or deposits made without 
consultation with the Department of Global Education and 
formal application approval from the Superintendent.  
• STEP 2: CAO-25 Application 
After consulting with the Department of Global Education 
and head of school, the CAO-25 application shall be 
submitted to the Director of Global Education no less than 
10-12 months before departure.  The proposal and official 
application must be completed, reviewed by the 
principal/head of school, and endorsed with an official letter 
from them. The application then requires approval by the 
Department of Global Education, which will then seek 
approval from the appropriate district leaders, before 
obtaining final approval from the Superintendent. Again, No 
arrangements should be made, payments or deposits 
placed without approval first from the Superintendent. You 
cannot gauge student interest or engage with families 
without program approval. District leadership and/or the 
Superintendent may have questions about your application 
or ask that aspects of the proposal be changed or removed.  
• STEP 3: Approval 
Once the CAO-25 application is approved by the 
Superintendent, in consult with your principal/head of 
school, you may begin to promote the international 
program to students, families, and your school community. 
Should your itinerary, roster, or any other aspect of your 
approved application package change, you must notify the 


Page 4:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 4 of 104 
Department of Global Education in writing as soon as 
possible.  
SAFETY PREPAREDNESS  
• Travel Advisories/Warnings: Travel to countries cited as a 
Level 3 or 4 in the United States Department of State Travel 
Warning Listing or the Center for Disease Control (CDC) are 
prohibited. For countries listed as a Level 2, consult the 
Department of Global Education in advance. The Boston 
Public Health Commission and Department of Global 
Education will continue to monitor country destinations for 
safety. The program leader, principal/head of school are also 
responsible for checking the State Department and CDC 
throughout the trip planning process as levels change. 
Please note: The Superintendent reserves the right to cancel 
any field trip up to and including the day of departure to 
manage risk. 
• Insurance: Through On Call International insurance, the 
district provides medical coverage for international BPS 
sponsored trips for BPS students, BPS staff participants, and 
chaperones. On Call will serve as the primary source for 
medical insurance while abroad.  However, in some cases, if 
a hospital visit is required, students may be required to pay 
out of pocket, and be reimbursed by On Call later. Families 
will want to budget for this just-in-case expense.  
The On Call insurance policy does NOT include cancellation 
or trip interruption insurance should the trip be canceled or 
interrupted for any reason other than medical. 
Cancellation/interruption must be due to the traveler 
getting sick, injured, or someone in the traveler’s immediate 


Page 5:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 5 of 104 
family being sick, injured, or death. Students/Families would 
need to show proof of a sickness/injury and the 
sickness/injury must be so disabling as to cause them to 
cancel/interrupt their trip. If there is a sickness/death for 
their family member they would need to show proof of that 
too. Save all receipts for flights/lodging for reimbursement 
purposes and a claim form would need to be filled out. 
Families will need to know in advance that Trip Cancellation 
has a $2,000 limit, and Trip Interruption has a $2,500 limit.  
Again, the superintendent reserves the right to cancel a trip 
for any reason and at any time for safety purposes–Cancel 
for Any Reason Insurance (CFAR) is NOT provided by the 
district.  Therefore, all trip participants are strongly 
encouraged to purchase their own (CFAR) insurance to 
protect their trip investment. 
On Call International provides overseas evacuation 
insurance (enabling students who become seriously ill or for 
whom there is some kind of emergency to be returned to 
the United States). On Call International must coordinate, 
approve, and perform the evacuation.   Emergency family 
travel arrangements are covered up to a limit if the traveler 
is hospitalized for 2 or more days. 
• Informed Parental Consent, Associated Risks, and 
Indemnity:  Families must sign the customized Informed 
Parental Consent, Associated Risks, and Indemnity form 
explicitly developed for their travel program by the director 
of Global Education and BPS Legal in collaboration with the 
program leader. The program leader is responsible for 
initiating this form based on a template provided from the 
Department of Global Education.  


Page 6:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 6 of 104 
• District Training: Program leaders must attend training for 
effective in-field risk management and response practice. 
This training is offered by the district once per year. Please 
email the Department of Global Education for details. If you 
miss the training, you must schedule a meeting with DGE to 
supplement.  
o While this training is mandatory for program leaders, it 
is recommended that one additional chaperone from 
the team attend the training with the program leader. 
However, in cases where other chaperones (non-
program leaders) are not able to attend the in-person 
training (due to budget, space, or scheduling), it is 
expected that they will receive training and 
information from pre-travel meetings/virtual webinars, 
and guidance from the Department of Global 
Education and program leader in preparation for their 
role. All chaperones will be required to review this 
document and participate in pre-travel meetings with 
the Department of Global Education. 
o CPR & First Aid: At least two chaperones (including the 
program leader) must hold valid CPR AND first aid 
certification. The district will offer this training at least 
once per year for program leaders. Please email the 
Department of Global Education for details. Ensure the 
availability of a first aid kit/supplies from the 
Department of Global Education. Verify emergency and 
medical information and contact details. 
• STEP Program: Program leaders, or parents must register 
students and chaperones through the U.S. State 
Department’s STEP (Smart Traveler Enrollment Program) 
program. If you have non-U.S. citizens traveling with your 


Page 7:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 7 of 104 
group, contact their respective embassies to see what 
services they would provide these individuals in the event of 
an emergency. U.S. embassies abroad do not necessarily 
assist non-U.S. citizens in emergencies overseas.  
• Transportation: School buses or BPS approved 
transportation vendors’ vehicles MUST be used to transport 
students to and from field trips or athletic events, regardless 
of how the trip is paid for. Privately owned vehicles, vehicles 
from non-approved vendors, ride sharing transportation 
services such as Uber and Lyft, or leased vans are not to be 
utilized to transport students to and from field trips or 
athletic events, except in the case of a bona fide medical 
emergency. Refer to TRN-03 and CAO-22 for information 
and regulations on field trip transportation. 
• Itineraries: Upon advance review of itineraries, BPS reserves 
the right to deny schools to participate in field trip activities 
on their itinerary where the risks of the activity outweighs 
the intended learning outcomes of the program. The 
program leader, in collaboration with the chaperone team, 
are required to submit a risk analysis for each part of the 
program that identifies the top 5 risks/concerns associated 
with the program.  
GOVERNMENT RESOURCES TO SUPPORT PREPARATION 
• U.S. State Dept. Travel: www.travel.state.gov 
• Overseas Security Council: 
https://www.osac.gov/Pages/Home.aspx 
• U.S. State Dept. Passport Application: 
http://travel.state.gov/passport/ 


Page 8:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 8 of 104 
• U.S. State Dept. Medical: 
http://travel.state.gov/content/passports/english/go/checklis
t.html#checklist_parentitem_1 
• U.S. Embassies Abroad: www.usembassy.state.gov 
• Visa Req. for U.S. Citizens Abroad: 
http://travel.state.gov/content/visas/english/general/america
ns-traveling-abroad.html 
• Center for Disease Control Traveler’s Health: 
http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/destinations/list.aspx 
• U.S. Customs & Border Protection: http://www.cbp.gov/ (877-
227-5512) 
MEDICAL PREPARATION FOR SAFE TRAVEL 
• Doctor’s Visit: Prior to the trip, all students and chaperones 
must inform their primary care doctor/travel clinic doctor of 
their trip location and have had a recent doctor’s visit and 
physical exam prior to departure. If any student has a 
serious medical or mental health condition, please be sure 
that their doctor writes a letter indicating that the child may 
safely attend and participate in trip activities. There are 
certain locations in the world where entry requires specific 
vaccinations, immunizations, and medications necessary for 
healthy travel--in those cases--all participants will be 
required to obtain those vaccinations, immunizations, and 
medications.  
• Medical Documentation: Chaperones must document and 
carry all students’ medical information, including any 
specialized immunizations or medications required by their 
doctors for travel. Participants are also required to list all 


Page 9:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 9 of 104 
medications that might be prescribed with this particular 
program in mind along with the other medications that 
they may take regularly.  Program leaders should send a 
final email to all participants to check on additional 
medications added before departure. 
• School Nurse & Counselor Review: The program leader 
must consult with the school leader to determine if, and 
what type of medical assistance is needed for participating 
students. To ensure accessibility, this step is crucial, and 
must take place before the field trip is secured. For 
additional questions, please consult the Health Services 
Department. Additionally, to thoroughly support a student's 
participation in a field trip, at least six weeks before 
departure (much longer for international and overnight field 
trip programs), consult with and, when necessary, receive 
training from the school nurse regarding any students who 
have medical needs. Also consult with the school counselor 
regarding mental and behavioral health needs. If any 
student has a serious medical or mental health condition, be 
sure that their doctor is aware of the essential participation 
criteria and location of the trip and writes a letter indicating 
that the child may safely attend and participate in trip 
activities. Keep this document on file with other key 
permissions slips and medical forms. 
• Nurse Verification Form: Review all students’ medical forms 
with the school nurse and guidance counselor to ensure all 
documents are completed and to be sure you are in the 
strongest position to support each student’s health while 
abroad. School nurses and counselors do not “clear” 
students for travel but will provide chaperones with 
guidance in supporting students while traveling. Consult 


Page 10:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 10 of 104 
with, and when necessary, receive training from and obtain 
written comments from the school nurse regarding any 
students who have expressed medical needs. Complete and 
submit the Nurse Verification form to the Department of 
Global Education.  
CHAPERONE CRITERIA 
• Role of the Program Leader (Lead Chaperone): The 
selection and approval of all chaperones is conducted by the 
principal/head of school. The program leader is a BPS 
employee and the lead chaperone organizing and leading 
the trip. The program leader is required to have experience 
leading, or co-leading BPS students (or students from 
another district) abroad previously and has the full support 
and approval of the principal/head of school to do so. The 
program leader leads the entire school team and is the main 
representative of the group and district while abroad. The 
program leader is responsible for ensuring all guidelines in 
CAO-22 and CAO-25 are followed and keeping the 
principal/head of school and the district informed of trip 
developments. The program leader is responsible for 
completing the International Field Trip Request Form and 
accompanying documents that are submitted to the 
principal/head of school and Department of Global 
Education for approval. The program leader is also 
responsible for organizing the chaperone team, student 
team, and pre-departure meetings.  
• Chaperone Selection: Every adult on the trip must be a 
chaperone and have a clear role. 


Page 11:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 11 of 104 
o Diverse Strengths:  Choose a chaperone team 
purposefully and wisely, considering strengths and 
what each chaperone can contribute to the overall 
experience. The goal is to have a well-rounded team of 
chaperones from different areas. We recommend that 
at least one member of the chaperone team — if not 
the program leader — speak the local language of the 
country visited. For example, consider chaperones who 
have visited the country before, and one who speaks 
the local language. Additionally, consider chaperones 
who are subject matter experts in the topic being 
explored, or who have professional medical/social 
emotional health experience. Efforts should be made 
for chaperones to be representative of the student 
group and include males and females where relevant.  
o Knowledge of Students: The selection and approval of 
chaperones by the principal/head of school should also 
be based on the individuals’ knowledge of, and rapport 
with, most of the student participants.  
• Chaperone Ratios: For international programs, the student-
to-chaperone ratio is 7:1, with a two-chaperone minimum. It 
is recommended that a chaperone reserve, or backup, be 
identified in the event a chaperone is no longer able to 
participate at the last minute or must leave the field. The 
reserve chaperone should have a valid passport and visa to 
travel to the destination. Tour guides and employees of 
third-party vendors contracted to help operate the trip are 
not considered chaperones, and do not factor into the 
student to chaperone ratio. All BPS and non-BPS 
chaperones are required to sign the Chaperone Agreement 
form. Refer to CAO-22 for additional chaperone criteria.  


Page 12:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 12 of 104 
• Non-BPS Chaperones: Other authorized chaperones may 
include parents and volunteers who must be 21 years of age 
or older. All non-BPS employee chaperones must submit a 
yearly CORI/SORI authorization form to the Office of Human 
Capital. Complete the eCORI form online. Contact the BPS 
Office of Human Capital (OHC) for CORI check and 
confirmation support. The principal/head of school and the 
lead chaperone are responsible for submitting authorization 
forms to OHC and must not allow chaperones to take part in 
activities until they have been CORI/SORI cleared. Non-BPS 
employees who chaperone on a field trip are not covered for 
liability by the Boston Public Schools. 
• BPS Employee Parent Chaperones: Chaperones who are 
parents/guardians of BPS students on the trip must provide 
the same level of care and attention to ALL of the student 
participants. If a BPS chaperone’s child who does not attend 
the participating school must attend the program, the child 
must be a BPS student and in the same grade or age range 
as participating students. In this case, the BPS employee is 
responsible for incurring all costs associated with their 
child’s participation.  
PASSPORTS & VISAS  
• Check Student & Chaperone Passports: During the 
recruitment process, physically check all students’ passports 
well before your travel date to ensure that they are valid for 
travel and will be valid at least six months after your return 
date. Students must renew or apply for a first-time passport 
as soon as possible as the process can be lengthy.  


Page 13:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 13 of 104 
• Non-U.S. Passports:  Determine who holds a non-U.S. 
passport. There are many countries that do not require U.S. 
passport holders to have a visa but require them for NON-
U.S. passport holders. There are also countries that might 
require Americans to obtain a visa but do not require one for 
a non-U.S. passport holder. Identify the countries from 
which your travelers hold passports, as they might be 
questioned in customs or might have to contact other 
consulates if they lose their passports abroad. *Also plan for 
delays at border control at the airport for non-US passport 
holders.  
• Visa Requirements: Research if your destination requires a 
visa. Every country has a different application and timeline 
for obtaining a visa.  
• Parent Passports: Encourage parents to obtain valid 
passports and visas should they need to travel to the 
country for their child during an emergency.  
• Copy Passports: Copies of student and chaperone passports 
and visas must be left with families, and the principal/head 
of school. 
 
 


Page 14:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 14 of 104 
STUDENT ACCESSIBILITY, PARTICIPATION, AND CONDUCT 
Student Participation: Students not enrolled in the Boston Public 
Schools may not participate. Once on the field trip, student 
participants are not permitted to leave the group to visit friends, 
relatives etc., and rejoin the group. Students must remain with 
the group at all times.  
• Essential Participation Criteria: Before student recruitment 
begins, the program leader and principal/head of school 
shall work together to establish essential participation 
criteria for the trip that informs students and parents of the 
program objectives, all of the activities and risks associated 
with each itinerary activity, and trip location, to determine 
what accommodations or modifications may need to be 
made for students to successfully and safely participation in 
all or portions of the trip.  
• Student Recruitment: By default, any program is open to all 
students. However, there may be programs that are specific 
to certain students (i.e., class, club, team, grade level specific 
trips) with the consultation of the program leader and head 
of school that keeps in mind financial accessibility, diversity, 
and equity. The recruitment process must be transparent 
and fair. The chaperone team must create an environment 
and structures to support all students. Trips must be 
advertised to all students (within the school, particular 
grade, class, or program associated with the trip), regardless 
of their financial situation. If there is a formal process for 
being enrolled on your trip, such as an application, it must 
first be approved by the head of school and have a clear 
rubric that demonstrates the essential criteria for an 
applicant. A student’s ability to pay may not be a criterion 


Page 15:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 15 of 104 
for field trip participation. If a student is denied admission to 
a trip, be prepared to speak to the student, administration, 
or family if there are questions about your selection process. 
Keep a record of all applications and decisions made.  
Accessibility 
• Field Trip Location Selection: Program leaders must 
consider their student demographics when selecting field 
trip locations, sites, and activities. The location of the trip 
must tie directly to the objectives and learning outcomes of 
the program. Specifically, determine the impact the 
locations, sites, and activities that may have on diverse 
populations such as students of color, ELL students, 
students who identify with the LGBTQIA+ community, 
students with disabilities, those who may be in the minority 
during your field trip experience, and those students who 
belong to groups that have experienced marginalization in 
the location being visited. Program leaders must work to 
prepare students for sensitive experiences and ensure that 
the program is safe and inclusive for all students. Consult 
the Department of Global Education for resources if needed.  
• Access and Inclusion: Students with English Language 
Learner status, 504 plans, and/or IEPs cannot be denied 
access to field trips due to their ability. It is the responsibility 
of the school to ensure that all accommodations normally 
provided to a student as indicated in their educational plans 
are made available during a field trip, including medication. 
See Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 Medication 
Administration for information about medical dispensation 
on field trips. Participating students’ IEP or 504 plan shall be 


Page 16:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 16 of 104 
available to any staff coordinating and/or participating in 
the field trip to meet the child’s needs. 
• Student Health: If a student has a serious medical or mental 
health condition, please be sure that their doctor is 
informed of the essential participation criteria and location 
of the trip and writes a signed letter on letterhead indicating 
that the child may safely attend and participate in trip 
activities. The program leader must keep this document on 
file with other key permissions slips and medical forms. 
Again, also consult with your school nurse at least 6 weeks 
in advance.  
• Inclusive Accommodations: In collaboration with the 
student and their family, the program leader and 
principal/head of school shall work with transgender and 
gender nonconforming students to provide 
accommodations (including rooming) that affirm the 
student’s gender identity while also ensuring safety. 
Program leaders should work with students and families to 
make sure all travel documents (e.g., airline ticket, passport) 
reflect their legal names as listed on government issued 
identification, while all unofficial documents and materials 
may reflect the student’s preferred name. Please view 
additional rooming guidelines from the Office of Equity.  
CONDUCT  
The BPS Code of Conduct applies on all field trips. BPS students 
and parents are required to sign a BPS Student Traveler & Family 
Agreement Form regarding student conduct while participating 
in a BPS sponsored field trip. Following an investigation, if the 
program leader, in consult with the principal/head of school and 


Page 17:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 17 of 104 
Central Office staff, determines that a student’s conduct while on 
an overnight trip poses a risk to themselves or the safety of the 
group, or is no longer manageable by BPS staff in the field, the 
district reserves the right to request and arrange for that student 
to return home. The district also reserves the right to request that 
families assume responsibility for all or a portion of the costs 
associated with their child’s return. Students may be subject to 
further disciplinary action and will be provided the opportunity to 
have a formal hearing at the school level upon return. The school 
must document the parent/guardian’s consent of this policy prior 
to the trip.  
• Dismissal Transportation Protocol: If a student is to be 
dismissed from an overnight field trip, the student’s 
parent/guardian must be notified in advance and should 
agree to meet the student at the airport or other agreed 
upon destination. If the parent/guardian is not reachable, 
the student’s principal/head of school or appropriate school-
based point of contact must be notified and agree to meet 
the student at the airport or other agreed upon destination. 
Students under the age of 16 must be accompanied on their 
flight by a chaperone. Students over the age of 16 may fly 
unaccompanied, though a chaperone must accompany the 
student to the airport to ensure the student checks in for 
their flight. (Age requirements may be subject to specific 
airline/train/bus guidelines). Any costs assumed in this 
regard will be the responsibility of the parent/guardian. 
Program leaders must inform families of this protocol at or 
before initial promotional meetings.  
• Pre-departure Program Dismissal: In the event a student is 
to be dismissed from an international field trip program 
before departure, a Pre-departure Incident Report must be 


Page 18:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 18 of 104 
submitted to the Department of Global Education (DGE). A 
chaperone cannot dismiss a student from a trip without 
approval from the principal/head of school. The 
principal/head of school must approve the recommendation 
for dismissal by signing the pre-departure incident report. 
The report should then be filed with the DGE, who will 
review and file the report. Any loss of fees or deposits 
associated with early dismissal will be absorbed by the 
family, which must be communicated before any deposits 
are made by families. Program leaders must inform families 
of this protocol at or before initial promotional meetings.  
PRE-DEPARTURE MEETINGS  
• Student Meetings: Program leaders must conduct at least 
three (more are recommended) student meetings before 
departure. This does not include the mandatory parent 
meeting; however, students should be encouraged to 
attend the parent meeting as well. Meetings should review 
logistics and prepare students to be mindful, healthy, 
responsible, and safe travelers. Most programs hold many 
more meetings to prepare students for the challenges and 
rewards of the travel experience.  
• Parent Meetings: Program leaders must conduct at least 
one (more are recommended) parent/guardian meeting 
(with each family, or all families together). This does not 
include the initial meeting to promote the trip. Please note 
that if traveling to a Level 2 destination issued by the Center 
for Disease Control (CDC) or State Department, the program 
leader is required to inform parents of the medical or safety 
concerns and precautionary plan. Please consult with the 
Department of Global Education before this meeting. For 


Page 19:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 19 of 104 
information on staying healthy while traveling, go to the 
CDC page on Travelers’ Health/Medical Tourism. Your entire 
group and their families must attend a mandatory 
information session. All chaperones should be present and 
play a role in this meeting.  
• Meeting Topics: During pre-departure meetings, the 
following topics must be reviewed (others may be discussed 
at the lead chaperone’s discretion): 
○ Trip’s educational purpose 
○ Behavior expectations 
○ Detailed itinerary 
○ Review of country landscape (health, cultural norms, 
safety, and security) 
○ Insurance coverage 
○ Required travel documents  
○ Packing list  
○ Communication plan and emergency contact 
information  
○ Transportation plans and logistics  
○ Review and collect permission forms 
○ Meals and accommodations 
○ In-country transport (be specific, as modes of transport 
vary country to country) 
○ Expectations for in-country expenses and procedures 
to exchange money, if applicable 
○ Passport and visa requirements, if applicable 
○ Program provider documents.  
Contact the Department of Global Education for sample meeting 
agendas and templates and support with meeting agendas.  
Important Meeting Notes:  


Page 20:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 20 of 104 
● Document parent/family attendance.  
● Utilize zoom meetings when necessary. 
● Develop a plan for families who may need translation 
services at the meeting; students should not serve as their 
parent/guardian’s translator.  
● If a parent/guardian is unable to attend a meeting, at least 
one trip chaperone (who is a BPS employee) must 
physically meet with the parent/guardian about the trip 
before taking the student abroad. Document this private 
meeting for your records. 
Chaperone Team Meetings:  
Program leaders must conduct at least three pre-departure 
chaperone team meetings. Meeting topics to include:  
○ Assign chaperone roles for pre, during, and post trip;  
○ Review Emergency Action Plan (EAP) and insurance 
coverage;  
○ Student paperwork (Binders) 
○ Participants  
○ Student Code of Conduct Agreement 
○ The Pre-Departure Incident Report and the incident 
report form for while on the trip 
○ For non-BPS employee chaperones, review their 
knowledge of BPS policies and chaperone expectations 
○ Review detailed itinerary 
○ Distribute responsibilities 
○ Map out plans that include movement from one place 
to another and program transitions.  
○ Determine if there are any students who require extra 
support, or physical/medical accommodations 


Page 21:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 21 of 104 
○ Review with the team any recommendations, advice, 
or instructions that you have received from the school 
nurse, guidance counselor, parent, or primary care 
doctor. 
Non-BPS Chaperones: 
Along with CORI/SORI clearance they must schedule a 
consult with the Department of Global Education at least 8 
weeks prior to departure and attend at least one pre-trip 
parent meeting and at least one student meeting.  
All non-BPS chaperones must know the details of the trip, 
the Emergency Action Plan (EAP), the BPS Code of Conduct, 
and other district and school-based rules. The program 
leader must be sure all non-BPS chaperones understand 
BPS rules and schedule a consult with the Department of 
Global Education. 
COMMUNICATION PLAN  
• International Phone Service Coverage: Program leaders 
must have international cell phone coverage for the 
duration of the trip for communication with BPS and 
families in the event of an emergency. This cell phone must 
be on at all times so you may be contacted in case of an 
emergency. If this is not possible due to your location, please 
arrange a communication plan with your principal/head of 
school and the Department of Global Education. If such 
international coverage requires you to purchase an 
international plan or to accrue additional costs due to the 
trip, please submit your receipts to the BPS Finance Office 
for reimbursement. Program leaders must also carry the 
phone numbers for the principal/head of school or 


Page 22:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 22 of 104 
sponsoring district department, and the Department of 
Global Education. You are required to call your head of 
school and the Department of Global Education anytime 
there is an emergency.  
• District Communication: Codify a clear communication plan 
with your principal/head of school or sponsoring district 
department, and the Director of Global Education prior to 
departure. The director of Global Education will initiate a 
group chat with the program leader, and head of school on 
WhatsApp. You must check in with the Director of Global 
Education via phone, text (download WhatsApp for free for 
messaging), or email upon arrival, every 48 hours, whenever 
the itinerary significantly changes, whenever you expect to 
lose cell/email coverage, upon departure, and upon safe 
return. You MUST check in via phone call to your Head of 
School and the Department of Global Education when there 
is an incident. 
• Definitions of communication types and expectations: 
 
 


Page 23:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 23 of 104 
 
Green Communication: No immediate concern.  
Program leader: Notifies head of school and on-call BPS 
staff about arrival, departure, changes in itinerary, loss of 
connectivity, highlights of programs, photos. *Check in daily 
via text, phone call, email. 
Yellow Communication: A Yellow Call is a reportable situation or 
event, but no threat to life, limb, eyesight, or potential for severe 
emotional trauma. The incident is managed effectively in the 
field by program leader, but could devolve to a serious or critical 
incident, and requires attention from BPS on-call staff.  
Program leader: (1) Notifies Head of School and on-call BPS 
staff; (2) Documents Incident SOAP Report (3) Monitors  (4) 
Updates on-call BPS staff  
Red Communication: Critical, violent time sensitive incident, 
illness, injury; or event that resulted in loss or potential loss of life, 
limb, eyesight. Student disciplinary violations.  
Requires IMMEDIATE RESPONSE of program leader: (1) 
Alerts appropriate local medical care, local law enforcement, 
and/or shelter, triggers insurance support if able to do so. (2) 
Notifies head of school and on-call BPS staff; (3) Documents 
Incident SOAP Report (4) Monitors  (5) Updates head of 
school and on-call BPS staff  
Refer to BPS International Field Trip Communication Plan for 
more information. 
• Communication with Families: Set expectations regarding 
communication during travel between chaperones/student 


Page 24:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 24 of 104 
travelers and the principal/families. Families must know 
whom to call 24/7 in case of an emergency. If you need 
support in family communication before, during, and after 
the trip, contact the Department of Global Education.  
• Communication with Students: Set and remind students 
and families of the expectations for social media usage 
while abroad. Discuss what is, and is not acceptable for 
posting, recording, and sharing on social media. Make clear 
the boundaries, confidentiality, and privacy of other 
students, staff members, and visiting communities as it 
pertains to social media footage. These expectations should 
be discussed several times during the pre-departure 
meetings and while in the field. *Remember that the BPS 
Code of Conduct is applicable.  
DOCUMENTATION & FORMS 
● Documents for Students & Families: Prepare, distribute to, 
and collect from each participating student and chaperone 
the following: 
○ Parental Authorization for International Field Trip form 
○ Medical Information Form  
○ Medication Administration Form 
○ Chaperone Agreement Form 
○ Student & Family Conduct Agreement Form 
○ Student Support for Field Trip Travel Form 
○ Any Parental Waivers associated with your program.  
○ If applicable, prepare, distribute, and collect the 
Notarized Parent/Guardian Airline Travel Consent 
Form. (Some countries, airlines, and travel companies 


Page 25:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 25 of 104 
require this. Research your particular trip to see if this 
applies.)  
○ If your program includes a homestay, refer to CAO-26 
Homestay Guidelines for required forms.  
● Documents to Submit to Central Office Approval: The 
following documents must be submitted at least 10-12 
months in advance of the trip to the Department of Global 
Education for the program to be reviewed, and the 
necessary signatures obtained for approval. You must send 
your completed application to the Department of Global 
Education for review and feedback prior to final submission. 
Below is an overview of the required documents. A more 
detailed list is included in the application section of this 
circular.  
○ CAO-25 International Field Trip Request Form (with 
original signature of the Headmaster/Principal or 
sponsoring District Department, and Program Leader) 
○ Signed Cover Letter (on school letterhead) addressed 
to the superintendent and Department of Education 
from the principal/head of school/district department 
lead stating support for the proposed trip. 
○ International trip narrative:  
■ What was the student recruitment and selection 
process? 
■ What are the student learning outcomes of your 
program? 
■ How will this program build students’ global 
competence (investigate the world, communicate 
ideas, weigh perspective, take action: identify all 
that apply and how they will be addressed 
through your program). 


Page 26:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 26 of 104 
■ What specific standards are addressed in your 
program, and how will they be addressed? 
■ How and when will your students reflect on what 
they learned from this experience? 
○ Itinerary (detailed): Day-by-day and hour by hour (or 
morning/afternoon/evening) format providing detailed 
information about program (i.e. 
hotels/accommodations, sites visited, activities 
planned, meetings held, curfew set, and meals 
scheduled for the morning, afternoon, and evening) 
○ Emergency Action Plan  
○ Nurse Verification Form  
○ CAO-25 Acknowledgment Form  
○ Tentative Student Traveler Roster: [Prior to departure, 
the program leader must submit a FINAL roster of all 
confirmed student travelers that includes: BPS ID, their 
name, grade, age, D.O.B, the country in which their 
passport is issued, emergency contact name and 
number, and (NEW) if student is traveling abroad for 
the first time.  
Important Note: **Submit documents for Water Activities 
(CAO-27)) if applicable.* While you do not need to submit 
to the central office a copy of each Parental Authorization 
for International Field Trip permission, this form must be 
on file at your school when your trip request is submitted 
to the district office. 
● Documents to Leave with your principal/head of school:  
○ CAO-25 circular with checklists  
○ Permissions Slips (updated based on contact 
verification done with families) 


Page 27:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 27 of 104 
○ Student & Family Conduct Agreement Form 
○ Parental Waivers  
○ Medical Information Form and Medical Administration 
Form 
○ Notarized Airline Consent Form (if applicable) 
○ Copies of passports, visas, resident cards and other 
travel related documents 
○ Emergency Action Plan (EAP) 
○ Insurance Information 
○ Fire Prevention and Safety Information 
○ International Program Incident Report (blank for 
reference) 
○ Finalized Homestay List and other homestay 
documents (if applicable) 
○ Water Activities Forms (if applicable)  
● Documents to Take Abroad:  
○ Permissions Slips (updated based on contact 
verification done with families) 
○ Medical Information Form and Medical Administration 
Form 
○ Student & Family Conduct Agreement Form 
○ Parental Waivers  
○ Notarized Airline Consent Form (if applicable) 
○ Copies of passports, visas, resident cards and other 
travel related documents 
○ Emergency Action Plan (EAP) 
○ Insurance Information 
○ BPS Field Guide Protocols with Emergency Phone 
Numbers 
○ Fire Prevention and Safety Information 


Page 28:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 28 of 104 
○ International Programs Incident Report (blank and/or 
completed) 
○ International Witness Report Form (blank and/or 
completed) 
○ Incident Investigation Log (blank and/or completed) 
○ SOAP Note (blank and/or completed) 
○ List of addresses and emergency contacts in country 
for all travelers 
○ Homestay documents, if applicable  
○ Water activities form, if applicable  
○ Program leader carries originals of permission slips and 
medical forms; other chaperones carry copies.  
DURING THE FIELD TRIP PROGRAM  
● Team Safety: If you believe conditions are unsafe or 
unhealthy at any point on the trip, it is the program leader’s 
responsibility to make adjustments in the interest of 
group/individual safety. Consult the Department of Global 
Education during the trip when you have questions 
regarding trip safety. 
● Conduct Safety Reviews with Students in the Field: The 
following topics must be reviewed with students:  
○ Program leaders conduct a fire and safety assessment 
and fire drill (Fire Prevention and Safety Instructions) 
when you arrive at EACH NEW accommodation. Share 
the assessment with the chaperone team and prepare 
for orientation and fire drill. 
○ Share evacuation plan and emergency plans. Discuss 
where students go during an emergency or otherwise. 


Page 29:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 29 of 104 
Discuss where students go if they are separated from 
the group during an activity.  
○ Ensure students have a list of the key addresses 
(hotel/chaperone/host family contact information) and 
emergency information for the US and the 
international destination as well as copies of all travel 
documents. Share where you are staying (room 
number if applicable) and how to reach you on the trip.  
○ Conduct in-country orientation for conduct and 
cultural expectations. Set expectations regarding social 
media. This is especially critical during an emergency. 
○ Conduct safety orientations for service learning 
projects where teams work to construct, alter, and/or 
repair structures, including painting and decorating 
and for agricultural projects; chaperones, with support 
of program providers, must conduct a safety 
orientation at the beginning of each activity.  
● Student Debriefs/Reflections:  
○ Conduct morning briefings to review the day’s itinerary 
and key information. Ask and answer questions.  
○ Conduct afternoon and/or evening debriefings to 
review the next day’s itinerary, gather feedback, 
process the day’s learning, and make any necessary 
adjustments. Engage students in conversations that 
help them process their experiences. Help them to 
reflect and break down stereotypes so that when they 
return, they have a deeper understanding of the 
culture and country they visited. Draw connections to 
how they will take the experience home with them, 
and how the lessons they have learned will translate 
back home.  


Page 30:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 30 of 104 
● Check-Ins and Student Supervision: 
○ Conduct frequent check-ins with the chaperone team 
to assess programming, student dynamics, and to 
make any adjustments.  
○ Conduct frequent check-Ins with students about their 
behavioral and physical health as well as their ability to 
process their trip experiences.  
○ Conduct nightly bed checks to ensure students are in 
their rooms at the designated time. If staying in a 
hotel/hostel, be sure to request in advance for students 
to be placed near chaperones. If students are with host 
families, share the BPS policy of nightly bed checks to 
ensure students are safely in their rooms each night. 
Students should know exactly how to get in touch with 
a chaperone in case of an emergency (room number or 
phone number if staying with a host family).  
○ Establish a curfew with clear guidelines, and ensure 
doors are open if students congregate in the evening. 
Adults should stay close by and conduct frequent 
expected and unexpected room checks. Be mindful 
about romantic relationships among students. 
○ Do not leave students alone! Students should be 
accompanied by chaperones (or if applicable, host 
families and students) unless part of a scheduled 
activity and age appropriate, as approved by their 
parent/guardian in advance. However, if 
unaccompanied as part of a scheduled and structured 
activity, students should be in at least groups of three, 
AND always know how to reach an adult chaperone. 
○ Conduct regular, frequent headcounts and buddy 
checks throughout the day.  


Page 31:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 31 of 104 
INTERNATIONAL PROGRAM INCIDENT REPORTING AND 
SUPPORT  
Contact your head of school and the Department of Global 
Education for any emergency that results in the admittance of a 
student or chaperone to a hospital or clinic, or if you fear for the 
safety of anyone on your trip at any time. When in doubt, call! 
Emergencies may be of a medical, environmental, political, 
behavioral, legal, logistical, or other nature. You MUST check in 
via phone call to the Department of Global Education when there 
is an incident. Refer to BPS International Field Trip 
Communication Plan for more information. 
[NEW] Examples of incidents (this is not an exhaustive list): 
Green Examples: Positive group gains, dynamic and culture, 
media coverage 
Yellow Examples: Fever, loss of passport, diarrhea, 
constipation, vomiting when prescription medication is 
administered by BPS staff, lost/damaged/insufficient 
prescription medication, tooth loss/ crack/chip, animal or 
insect encounters that could potentially result in injury, any 
time insurance is used or consulted, insect bites or stings 
out of the ordinary, lost or stolen luggage, challenges in 
Customs. 
Red Examples: Sexual assault, terrorism, missing person, 
crime/theft; head injury, loss of consciousness, contraction 
of parasite and/or infestation, animal bites, transportation 
accident, severe allergic reaction, exposure to any 
communicable diseases, eye injury, heat exhaustion/stroke, 
hyperthermia, significant violations of student/chaperone 
conduct contract (fighting, alcohol, drug use, possession of 


Page 32:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 32 of 104 
weapons, bullying, harassment, persistent behavior from 
participant that is disruptive, poses a risk to team and the 
success of the program), severe weather, exposure to any 
toxic or potentially toxic chemical/irritant  
➤ Note: This list is not exhaustive. Any additional incident not 
listed but deemed unusual or potentially harmful by the program 
leader, should be reported. Yellow incidents have the potential to 
quickly progress to Red incidents. Thus, yellow incidents should 
be monitored closely, and On-Call BPS staff should be kept 
abreast of any updates, and changes in status.  
File an International Program Incident Report via email if possible 
OR as soon as circumstances permit. Utilize the SOAP note, 
witness reports and incident investigation logs as necessary. Turn 
in the original reports to the Department of Global Education as 
soon as you return to Boston. When incidents occur, it is critical 
that everything is documented.  
AFTER THE FIELD TRIP (MANDATORY) 
● Medical Follow-Up: Depending on travel location and 
prescribed travel medication, call all students and families 
after the trip to remind students to continue to take all 
prescribed travel medication. Additionally, remind students 
(and inform parents/guardians) to see a doctor immediately 
if they are not feeling well after the trip and to inform the 
doctor of their recent travels. 
● Incident Reports: If applicable, file and follow up with 
International Programs Incident Report, International 
Programs Witness Report and International Programs 
Incident Log. 


Page 33:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 33 of 104 
● District Survey: Complete the BPS Post-International 
Program Survey to provide feedback on your experience. 
AFTER THE FIELD TRIP (SUGGESTED) 
● Write thank you notes. 
● Present to school, family, and the community about the 
experience. 
● Conduct related creative and/or analytical projects to 
showcase student learning.  
● Write a news article about the trip for a local newspaper or 
website. 
● Email stories, journals, and pictures of your trip to the 
Department of Global Education.  
 
 


Page 34:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 34 of 104 
 
For more information, questions, and support about this 
circular, please contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Teaching and Learning 
Department: 
Department of Global Education  
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
315-601-0292 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 35:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 35 of 104 
INTERNATIONAL FIELD TRIP CHECKLIST 
Field Trip Category(s): ____________________________________________  
(For category, see CAO-22.) 
Site:  _____________________________________________________________  
 
 
Date:  __________________________________  
 
Alternate Date:  _________________________  
 
Item 
Complete? 
Review Superintendent Circular No. CAO-22, 
General Guidelines and Procedures for All Field 
Trips. 
 
Review Superintendent’s Circular on Medical 
Emergency Management, FSE-05 and Incident 
Data-Reporting and Release, SAF-04 for 
important safety protocols. While on the trip, the 
Department of Global Education must be notified 
in the event of a serious incident or emergency 
and should be used as a resource for questions 
regarding safety on international field trips. 
 
Select a site and investigate the appropriateness 
of the site in relation to the category of field trip. 
 
 
CAO-25 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT FORM 


Page 36:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 36 of 104 
Please sign this checklist, retain a copy for your file, submit the 
original to the school office for filing and attach to your 
completed request package.  
Your signature indicates that you read and understand the 
policies in this circular and that they have been/will be followed 
and all checklists throughout the trip planning and the trip 
implementation process have been or will be completed. 
 
School Name: ____________________________________________________  
 
_______________________________________________   __________________  
 
Signature of Program Leader  
Date  
 
_______________________________________________   __________________  
Signature of Principal/Head of School or 
 Date  
 
Sponsoring District Department   
 
 
 
 


Page 37:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 37 of 104 
INTERNATIONAL FIELD TRIP REQUEST DOCUMENT CHECKLIST  
The following documents must be submitted at least 10-12 
months in advance of the trip to the Department of Global 
Education so that the trip may be reviewed and the necessary 
signatures may be obtained. Complete this application with as 
much information and detail as you have available. Should 
additional and final details become available later, please update 
the Department of Global Education as soon as possible.  It is 
recommended that you send drafts of these documents to the 
Department of Global Education for review and feedback prior to 
final submission. Please type all documents and retain copies of 
all documents submitted. 
Documents to Submit to the Department of Global Education 
for Approval 
1. International Field Trip Request Form (with original 
signature of the principal/head of school or sponsoring 
district department, and program leader) 
2. Signed Cover letter (on school letterhead) addressed to the 
superintendent and Department of Education from the 
principal/head of school/district department lead stating 
support for the proposed trip. 
3. International Trip Narrative Educational Goals (please be 
detailed): 
a. What is the purpose of this international program? 
Why is it necessary, and why is this specific location 
relevant? 
b. What are the student learning outcomes of your 
program? 


Page 38:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 38 of 104 
c. How will this program build students’ global 
competence (investigate the world, communicate 
ideas, weigh perspective, take action: identify all that 
apply and how they will be addressed through your 
program). 
d. What specific standards are addressed in your 
program, and how will they be addressed? 
e. Describe the student recruitment and selection 
process? How did you ensure the process was 
equitable and inclusive? 
f. How and when will your students reflect on what they 
learned from this experience? 
4. Itinerary  
a. Day-by-day and hour by hour (or morning/afternoon/ 
evening) format providing detailed information about 
program (i.e., sites visited, activities planned, meetings 
held, curfew set, and meals scheduled for the morning, 
afternoon, and evening) 
5. Emergency Action Plan  
6. Nurse Verification Form  
7. CAO-25 Acknowledgment Form 
8. Tentative Student Traveler Roster (Prior to departure, the 
program leader must submit a FINAL roster of all confirmed 
student travelers that includes: BPS ID, their name, grade, 
age, D.O.B, the country in which their passport is issued, 
emergency contact name and number, and if student is 
traveling abroad for the first time.  
Important Note: Submit documents for Water Activities 
(CAO-27) and/or Homestays (CAO-26) if applicable. 


Page 39:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 39 of 104 
 
 


Page 40:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 40 of 104 
 
INTERNATIONAL FIELD TRIP REQUEST FORM 
(This form along with all accompanying documents listed in this 
circular must be completed by the lead chaperone in 
consultation with the principal/head of school. It is submitted to 
the Department of Global Education at least four months prior to 
the trip.) 
School/District Department:  _____________________________________  
 
Head of School /Principal Information:  
Name: ______________________________________________________  
Cell phone: __________________________________________________  
Email: _______________________________________________________  
Select Field Trip Category (See CAO-22 for descriptions): 
● Instructional 
● Cultural 
● Community Building 
● Service Learning 
● Personal Growth & Development  
Program Destination(s): Include exact cities, or regions: 
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  


Page 41:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 41 of 104 
Dates of Trip:  
Departure Date: ________________ Return Date:  ___________________  
Student Data: Send complete student roster to Dept. of Global 
Education before travel. Roster must include D.O.B, grade, 
country of passport issuance, emergency contact name and 
number.  
Number of Students:  ________________  
 
Number of First Time Student International Travelers: _______  
 
Chaperone Data: Chaperones: 7:1 ratio and minimum of 2 
chaperones  
Information  
Program Leader 
Chaperone 
Chaperone  
Name  
 
 
 
Cell Phone 
Number 
 
 
 
BPS 
Employee  
(Y/N) 
(Y/N) 
(Y/N) 
Back up # 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 42:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 42 of 104 
 
Information 
Chaperone  
Chaperone  
Chaperone  
Name 
 
 
 
Number 
 
 
 
BPS 
Employee 
(Y/N) 
(Y/N) 
(Y/N) 
Back Up # 
 
 
 
 
Information 
Chaperone  
Chaperone  
Chaperone  
Name 
 
 
 
Number 
 
 
 
BPS 
Employee 
(Y/N) 
(Y/N) 
(Y/N) 
Back Up # 
 
 
 
 
Funding  
Please note that: A criterion for participation, may not be the 
student and their family’s ability to pay. Also “100” school funds 
may not be used for international trips. 
Cost Per Person:  _________________________________  
 
Total Cost: $  _____________________________________  
 
 


Page 43:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 43 of 104 
Funding Source(s):  
(List funding sources below. Please detail how the trip was paid 
for and how students had access to this trip regardless of the 
trip’s cost.) 
 
 
 
Grant name/Grant Number (if applicable):  _______________________  
 
Fundraise with Private Grants BEDF Account Code/Description (if 
applicable): _______________________________________________________  
 
Country/Site Information 
Country(s) to be visited:  
 
Is this country(s) listed on the 
United States Department of 
State Travel warning list? 
 
Is this country(s) listed on the 
Center for Disease Control 
(CDC) warning list?  
 
In-Country/Site Contact Person 
and Title/Role: 
 
In-Country/Site Telephone # 
 
In-Country/Site Email Address 
 


Page 44:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 44 of 104 
Native language of in-
country/site contact person 
 
Can the in-country/site contact 
person speak English? 
 
 
Has your travel vendor/partner been vetted by the Department of 
Global Education/BPS Legal?         Yes        No 
Vendor Name: ______________________________________________  
Vendor Contact Name: ______________________________________  
Vendor Contact Number & Email: ___________________________  
AIRLINE TRANSPORTATION TO INTERNATIONAL DESTINATION  
(Please note: You may include your flight reservation as an 
attachment; however, the following section must still be 
completed.) 
Departing flight from US/Boston: 
Departure Date 
 
Departure Time 
 
Departure Location  
 
Departure Airlines 
 
Flight Number 
 
Departing Flight 
Arrival Date 
 


Page 45:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 45 of 104 
Arrival Time 
 
Arrival Location  
 
Return flight to US/Boston 
Return Date 
 
Return Time 
 
Return Location  
 
Return Airlines 
 
Flight Number 
 
Return Flight Arrival 
Date 
 
Arrival Time 
 
Arrival Location  
 
Additional Transportation in the U.S. (i.e., to and from airport): 
Will you be providing transportation for students to and from the 
airport?  ▢ Yes     ▢ No  
If no, how will students get to and from the U.S. airport?  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
If yes, please complete the chart below.  


Page 46:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 46 of 104 
Mode of 
Transportation  
 
Transportation Co. 
 
BPS Vendor # 
 
Company Number  
 
Pickup Location  
 
Pickup time 
 
 
Transportation to International Destination (other than airplane): 
Mode of 
Transportation  
 
Transportation Co. 
 
BPS Vendor # 
 
Company Number  
 
Pickup Location  
 
Pickup time 
 
Where will you be 
transported to? 
(Address of hotel, or 
drop off site) 
 
 
Transportation in Foreign Country 
All modes of transportation arranged within the foreign country:  


Page 47:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 47 of 104 
 
 
IN-COUNTRY LODGING INFORMATION  
Primary Lodging 
Contact information if students will be staying in a hotel or 
hostel: Itinerary must provide detailed information regarding 
lodging each night. 
Name of site  
 
Address  
 
Number  
 
Dates  
 
 
Name of site  
 
Address  
 
Number  
 
Dates  
 
 
 
 


Page 48:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 48 of 104 
 
Name of site  
 
Address  
 
Number  
 
Dates  
 
 
Does your trip include water activities? 
YES ▢     NO ▢ 
If yes, have you reviewed CAO-27, and completed the necessary 
forms? 
YES ▢     NO ▢ 
Home Stay  
*Note: The permissibility of Home Stay programs is currently 
under review.  
Will this program include a home stay?   YES ▢    NO ▢ 
If yes, is this home stay facilitated by a third-party vendor? If yes, 
please provide the company name and site contact info.  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  


Page 49:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 49 of 104 
Safety is the highest priority in the Boston Public Schools. Have 
you followed the Home Stay Guidelines CAO-26 and completed 
the necessary forms?    YES ▢    NO ▢ N/A 
Have parents/guardians signed the Home Stay Waiver form? 
YES ▢    NO     ▢ N/A 
Water Activities 
Does your program include water activities?     
YES ▢    NO      ▢ N/A 
If yes, have you reviewed CAO-27, and completed the necessary 
forms?    YES ▢    NO      ▢ N/A 
TRAVEL LOGISTICS  
Have you held (or will you hold prior to departure) at least three 
pre-departure student meetings to prepare the student team for 
the responsibilities of participating in an international trip as 
outlined in CAO-25?    YES ▢     NO ▢ 
Meeting Date: 
Meeting Date: 
Meeting Date: 
Have you held (or will you hold prior to departure) at least three 
chaperone meetings to prepare the adult team for the 
responsibilities of leading students on an international trip as 
outlined in CAO-25?    YES ▢     NO ▢ 
Meeting Date: 
Meeting Date: 
Meeting Date: 


Page 50:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 50 of 104 
Have you conducted (or will you conduct prior to departure) at 
least one parent meeting (in addition to the promotional 
meeting) to review required topics outlined in CAO-25?  
YES ▢     NO ▢ 
Meeting Date: 
If you are traveling to a destination with an alert from the CDC or 
State Department Level 2 country, will you provide families with 
the respective Informed Parental Consent, Associated Risk, 
Indemnity Form?      YES ▢     NO ▢ 
Do you have trip cancellation insurance?   YES ▢     NO ▢ 
Please describe the contingency plan should your departure 
and/or return travel be delayed:  
 
 
TRAVEL SAFETY AND RISK MANAGEMENT 
Have all travelers received (or will they all receive prior to 
departure) all travel immunizations, vaccinations, and relevant 
medications recommended by the CDC and their primary care 
doctors?     YES ▢     NO ▢ 
Comments:  
 
Who on your chaperone team speaks the local language? 


Page 51:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 51 of 104 
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Have the program leader and other chaperones reviewed the 
BPS Insurance Policy?     YES ▢     
NO ▢ 
Does each traveler have health insurance coverage abroad, 
including medical and political evacuation coverage? (BPS has 
this insurance for ALL BPS students and BPS chaperones.) 
YES ▢     NO ▢ 
Has the program leader and other chaperones reviewed the BPS 
Code of Conduct?    YES ▢     
NO ▢ 
Have all non-BPS employed chaperones scheduled a meeting 
with the DGE?       YES ▢    
NO ▢    
N/A ▢ 
Has the program leader attended (or will they have attended 
prior to departure) BPS Risk Management Training Abroad? 
 YES ▢    NO ▢ 
Training Date: _______________________________________________  
 (Training is valid for two school calendar years.) 
 
 


Page 52:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 52 of 104 
Has the program leader led BPS students abroad before? 
YES ▢    
NO ▢            
When? Provide the most recent date: _______________________  
If not, what experience(s) have prepared you to lead BPS 
students abroad? 
 
Do at least two chaperones hold valid (duration of the trip) CPR 
and First Aid certification?       YES ▢    
NO ▢ 
Names of certified chaperones: ___________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Name of chaperones:  ____________________________________________ 
 __________________________________________________________________  
Have you completed the Emergency Action Plan (EAP) for the 
country you are visiting?    YES ▢    NO ▢ 
Have you (or will you prior to departure) set up a Pre-Departure 
Risk Management meeting with the Department of Global 
Education?      YES ▢       NO ▢         N/A ▢ 
Have you (or will you prior to departure) submitted the 
Emergency Contact List for all travelers to the Department of 
Global Education?    YES ▢       NO ▢ 
Have you completed the Nurse Verification form? YES ▢      NO ▢ 


Page 53:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 53 of 104 
All CAO-25 “Checklists” MUST be followed by the program leader, 
other chaperones, and principal/head of school or district 
department sponsoring the trip before, during, and after the trip. 
Will you complete all “Checklists” before, during, and after the 
trip with the consult of your principal/head of school or district 
department?      YES ▢       NO ▢ 
SCHOOL/DISTRICT DEPARTMENT APPROVAL 
_________________________________________________   ________________  
 
Program Leader/Lead Chaperone 
Date 
_________________________________________________   ________________  
 Head of School/Principal or Sponsoring Dept. 
Date  
Signatures above indicate approval for the trip and attest that 
the CAO-25 checklist will be completed before, during, and after 
the trip. 
DISTRICT APPROVALS 
International field trips require the District approvals below:  
_________________________________________________   ________________  
 
Director of Global Education 
Date 
_________________________________________________   ________________  
 
Chief of Teaching & Learning  
 Date    
 
_________________________________________________   ________________  
 
Chief Financial Officer  
 Date   
_________________________________________________   ________________  
 
Superintendent  
Date   


Page 54:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 54 of 104 
 
EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN (EAP) 
International Field Trips 
Directions: 
● The lead chaperone must complete this form prior to 
departure. 
● All chaperones should carry this form throughout the trip. 
● Leave a copy of this form with the principal/head of school. 
● Submit this form as part of your package to the district.  
● Register your trip and student participants through the 
Safe Traveler Enrollment Program (STEP). program 
General Guidelines: 
● In the event of an emergency, REMAIN CALM.  
● Do not leave the injured person alone or without an adult 
present. 
● Call local EMS. 
● Accompany any injured student to the nearest medical 
facility. An adult chaperone (or adult designee) must be 
present with any injured student throughout the 
emergency.  
 
 


Page 55:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 55 of 104 
Emergency Contacts  
● Local EMS. 
● Insurance (See insurance card for the appropriate # for your 
destination.)  
● Head of school or designee cell #_______________________and 
director of Global Education (315-601-0292) for emergencies. 
See Emergency Communication and Protocols packet.   
● Parents/guardians must be informed and given updates 
throughout the medical emergency. (Your Head of School 
and DGE will help coordinate communication with 
parents/family.) 
U.S. State Department, the Center for Disease Control and other 
reputable sources, please complete the information below: 
Address and contact information for the nearest U.S. Embassy(s) 
while abroad: 
 
 
Address and contact information for the nearest embassy(s) for 
non-U.S. citizen travelers while abroad: 
 
 
Name and address of the nearest medical hospital or facility/s:  
 
 


Page 56:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 56 of 104 
 
PARENTAL AUTHORIZATION FOR INTERNATIONAL FIELD TRIP 
Directions:  
BPS Staff:  
● Use one form per trip.  
● Complete the School Portion of form. 
● Duplicate one form per student.  
● Send a copy home for parent and student signatures. 
● During the field trip, the signed, original form must be 
carried by the program leader and copies by the other 
chaperones. A photocopy must be left on file in the school 
office. 
Student First & Last Name:  _______________________________________  
School: ___________________________________________________________  
Destination (s): ___________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Purpose of Trip: __________________________________________________  
List of Activities: Parents must be informed of all activities.     
 


Page 57:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 57 of 104 
Supervision: (Check One.) 
 Students will be directly supervised by adult chaperones on 
this trip at all times. 
 Students will be directly supervised by adult chaperones on 
this trip with the following exceptions: 
Mode of Transportation: (Check all that apply.) 
 walking   school bus   MBTA    Other _________________ 
Students will leave from (where)_________________________at                       
(time) ____________________. 
Students will return to (where) ____________________________at 
about (time) _______________.  
 
Program Leader & Chaperone(s) in Charge:  ______________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Chaperone/Student Ratio: ________________ (maximum ratio 7:1) 
 
 


Page 58:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 58 of 104 
STUDENT AGREEMENT 
While participating in this field trip, I understand I will be a 
representative of BPS and my community. I understand that 
appropriate standards must be observed, and I will accept 
responsibility for maintaining good conduct and abiding by 
school-based rules and the Boston Public Schools’ Code of 
Conduct. 
_____________________________________________   ____________________  
 
Student Signature  
Date 
 
 
 


Page 59:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 59 of 104 
 
PARENTAL AUTHORIZATION FOR INTERNATIONAL FIELD TRIP 
Assumption of Risk, Waiver, Release, and Indemnity Hold 
Harmless Agreement 
 
Program leaders: Access the required Assumption of Risk, 
Waiver, Release, and Indemnity Hold Harmless Agreement 
template. Please make a copy of this template document before 
you edit the text in RED, and then share it with the director of 
Global Education. This document is to be reviewed by the 
director of Global Education & BPS Legal BEFORE sharing with 
parents/guardians for signature**  
This document is a requirement, and a binding legal document. 
Should you have any questions, please contact the Department 
of Global Education.  
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 60:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 60 of 104 
 
MEDICAL INFORMATION FORM 
IMPORTANT NOTES:  
Students may be in new and unfamiliar situations when 
traveling. It is critical that this form is completed thoroughly and 
accurately so we may be in the best position possible to support 
you/your child. 
Please indicate with an X ______ HERE if you would like to 
schedule a meeting with the program leader of the trip to discuss 
your child’s medical or mental health.  
All students must visit their primary care doctor prior to traveling 
on a BPS trip and be current on all immunizations and 
vaccinations for the U.S. in addition to the recommended 
immunizations and vaccinations for the country(s) to be visited. 
 
 


Page 61:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 61 of 104 
STUDENT INFORMATION  
Student’s Full Name   
Date of Birth  
 
Country of Origin  
 
Parent/ Guardian 
Name(s) 
 
Parent/Guardian 
Address 
 
Parent/Guardian 
Contact  
Cell:  
Home: 
Work:  
 
 


Page 62:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 62 of 104 
Emergency Contact # 1  
Emergency Contact # 2  
Name:  
Relationship to student:  
Address:  
 
Cell #:        
Work #: 
Email: 
Name:  
Relationship to student:  
Address:  
 
Cell #:        
Work #: 
Email: 
STUDENT HEALTH QUESTIONS 
Primary care physician’s name and contact information (in case 
of an emergency): 
 
 
Health insurance provider’s name, policy #, and contact 
information (in case of emergency):  
 
 
Insurance provider claim instructions/procedures (in case of 
emergency): 
 


Page 63:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 63 of 104 
Student has the following health conditions and/or allergies of 
which BPS should be aware: 
 
 
Physical health conditions: 
 
 
Behavioral/mental health conditions: (e.g., depression, anxiety, 
etc.) 
 
 
Allergies (food, medication, insects, plants, animals, etc.): 
 
 
Student takes the following medications (including over-the-
counter/ herbal) and/or prescriptions of which BPS should be 
aware. (Be sure to complete the Medical Administration Form):  
 
 
If medication is taken on an as-needed basis, specify the 
symptoms or conditions when medication is to be taken and the 
time at which it may be given again. 


Page 64:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 64 of 104 
 
 
Is there any factor that makes it advisable for your child to follow 
a limited program of physical activity? (i.e., asthma, recent 
surgery, heart condition, fear, etc.) If yes, specify the ways in 
which you wish their program limited. If the student has asthma, 
please attach the asthma action plan to this medical form. 
 
 
Are there any activities on the itinerary that your child cannot or 
should not do? 
 
 
Other than a yearly physical, is the student currently under a 
physician’s or other medical professional’s care (e.g., social 
worker, therapist, etc.)? If yes, please detail the reason. 
 
 
 
 


Page 65:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 65 of 104 
Other than a yearly physical, has the student been under a 
physician’s or other medical professional’s (e.g., social worker, 
therapist, etc.) care anytime in the last year. If yes, please detail 
the reason and dates of treatment. 
 
 
Please list any hospital, treatment center, surgical, psychiatric, or 
urgent care visits within the last year: (Please specify the date, 
the reason, the physician or professional seen, and the length of 
stay.) 
 
 
Additional information of which BPS should be aware concerning 
student’s health:  
 
 
 
 


Page 66:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 66 of 104 
I authorize the release of the information given above to 
chaperones and other school staff in order to coordinate services 
and understand that chaperones will consult with the school 
nurse about each student's health so they will be in the strongest 
position to support you/your child on this program. 
      
________________________________________________   _________________  
 
Student Signature, if at least 18 years of age      
Date       
 
________________________________________________   _________________  
 
Parent/Guardian Signature, if student is  
Date  
 
 
under 18 years of age  
 
▪ If necessary, attach a doctor's letter to this form. 
▪ If necessary, attach the asthma action plan to this form. 
▪ If necessary, attach copies that document student’s shots 
and immunizations to this form. 
 
 


Page 67:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 67 of 104 
 
MEDICAL FORM — OVERNIGHT TRIPS 
Medication Administration 
Please send only essential medications with your student on this 
trip and include over-the counter/herbal medications on this list. 
Student Name: ___________________________________________________  
Name of Medication: _____________________________________________   
Time(s) to be taken: _________________________________________  
Reason for Medication:  _____________________________________  
Side effects to be aware of/other information: _______________  
 _____________________________________________________________  
Name of Medication: _____________________________________________   
Time(s) to be taken: _________________________________________  
Reason for Medication:  _____________________________________  
Side effects to be aware of/other information: _______________  
 _____________________________________________________________  
Name of Medication: _____________________________________________   


Page 68:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 68 of 104 
Time(s) to be taken: _________________________________________  
Reason for Medication:  _____________________________________  
Side effects to be aware of/other information: _______________  
 _____________________________________________________________  
 _____________________________________________________________  
Additional information/special Instructions: 
 
 
 
I authorize my child to take the above medications on this trip. 
 
________________________________________________   _________________  
 
Student Signature, if at least 18 years of age 
Date 
 
________________________________________________   _________________  
 
Parent/Guardian Signature, if student is 
Date 
 
under 18 years of age 
 
 


Page 69:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 69 of 104 
 
NOTARIZED PARENT/GUARDIAN AIRLINE TRAVEL  
CONSENT FORM 
The parties to this agreement are: 
Parent/ Legal Guardian: 
Full Name and Surname: (hereinafter referred to as “the 
Parent/ Guardian”) __________________________________________  
Physical Address:  ___________________________________________  
Contact Details: _____________________________________________ 
 _____________________________________________________________  
Child: (hereinafter referred to as “the Child”) 
Full Name and Surname: ____________________________________  
 
Birth Date: __________________________________________________  
 
Traveling Guardian(s) and Contact Details: (hereinafter referred 
to as “The Traveling Guardians”) 
Full Name and Address: _____________________________________  
 _____________________________________________________________  


Page 70:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 70 of 104 
I hereby authorize the Child to travel with the Traveling 
Guardians to the following destination:  
The period of travel shall be from ____________ to ______________. 
Should it prove to be impossible to notify the Parent/ Guardian of 
any change in travel plans due to an emergency or unforeseen 
circumstances arising, I authorize the Traveling Guardian to 
authorize such travel plans. 
Should the Traveling Guardian in their sole discretion (which 
discretion shall not be unreasonably exercised) deem it advisable 
to make special travel arrangements for the Child to be returned 
home due to unforeseen circumstances arising, I accept full 
responsibility for the additional costs which shall be incurred 
thereby. 
I indemnify the Traveling Guardian against any and all claims 
whatsoever and howsoever arising, save where such claims arise 
from negligence, gross negligence, or willful intent during the 
specified period of this Travel Consent. 
I declare that I am the legal custodian of the Child and that I have 
legal authority to grant travel consent to the Traveling Guardian 
of the Child.  
Unless inconsistent with the context, words signifying the 
singular shall include the plural and vice versa. 
 
 


Page 71:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 71 of 104 
Signed at ____________________________________ on the _______day 
of __________, 20____. 
 
Signature  _____________________________________ (Parent/ Guardian) 
 
Signature _____________________________________________ (Witness 1)  
 
Signature ____________________________________________ (Witness 2) 
Witness signatures must be by independent persons and not by 
anyone listed on the Travel Consent form. 
 
On this _________ day of ___________________, 20___, before me, the 
undersigned authority, personally appeared and proved to me 
through satisfactory evidence of identity, to wit, to be the 
person(s) whose name(s) is/are signed on the attached document 
and who signed in my presence.  
Official Notary Signature: _________________________________________  
 
Name of Notary Typed, Printed or Stamped: 
 
 
Commission Expires:  _____________________________________________  
 
 


Page 72:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 72 of 104 
 
STUDENT SUPPORT INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMS FORM 
Note: This form is to be completed by students who intend to 
participate in an international program. The information is 
confidential, and will be used by Program Leaders to better 
understand, and support the needs of students while on program 
in a foreign country.  
Student First & Last Name:  _______________________________________  
 
When preparing for your international program, please think 
about the following questions, and respond as honestly as 
possible in order to be supported: 
What are you nervous about?  ____________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
What are you excited about? _____________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
What scares you about the trip location or activities on the 
itinerary? _________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 
 


Page 73:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 73 of 104 
When in a new environment, I get anxious when…________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
When in a new environment, I get upset when….. _________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
In order to get the most learning and benefits from this 
experience, I will need ____________________________________________  
 
 
Given the laws, customs, and culture of the country that we are 
visiting, what concerns do you have?  ____________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 
Would you prefer to speak in person with a member of the 
chaperone team to discuss this form, or share additional 
information?            Yes          No     
 
 


Page 74:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 74 of 104 
  
 
INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMS INCIDENT REPORT 
Incident reports should be used for all yellow and red incidents 
that are not fully described or investigated already through the 
SOAP Note.  
A. Complete all fields 
School/s: ____________________________________________________  
Date of Report:  _____________________________________________  
Country: ____________________________________________________  
Incident Date and Time:  ____________________________________  
Reporting Chaperone: _______________________________________       
 
 


Page 75:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 75 of 104 
B. Complete all Applicable Fields 
Victim(s) Name(s) 
Contact Information 
 
Suspect(s) Name(s) 
Contact Information 
 
Witness(s) Name(s) 
Contact Information 
 
Location of Event 
Address 
 
 
C. Nature of Incident (check all that apply) 
☐Injury 
☐Equipment Failure 
☐Behavioral/ 
Psychological 
☐Illness 
☐Missing/Separated 
Person  
☐Natural Disaster 
☐Physical Assault 
☐Sexual Assault 
☐Theft 
☐Property Damage  
☐Sexual 
Harassment 
☐Fatality 
☐Crime  
☐Political Upheaval  
☐Disease Outbreak    
☐Other: _________       
☐BPS Code of 
Conduct violation 
International Programs Incident Report, continued 


Page 76:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 76 of 104 
D. Narrative (Using facts, describe what happened): 
 
 
 
E. Activity at Time of Incident (check all that apply) 
☐Class time 
☐Service 
☐Homestay 
 
 
☐Traveling 
☐Fieldtrip 
☐Camping 
☐Hike/Jog/Walk 
☐Swimming 
☐Water Activity 
 
☐Other   _____________ 
  
F. Contributing Factors (Check all that apply) 
☐Not disclosed in Medical Form  
☐Animal/Insect/Plant 
☐Pre-Existing Condition 
☐Alcohol/Drugs/Medication 
☐Weather/Terrain 
☐Motor Vehicle 
☐Political/Cultural/Language 
☐Pre-Course Info 
☐Sports/Recreation 
☐Orientation/Training 
☐Other 
   
 
  
 
 


Page 77:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 77 of 104 
G. Action Taken 
Details 
First Aid 
When 
By Whom 
Type (ie. 
Medication, CPR, 
etc.) 
 
Emergency 
Evacuation 
 
 
Visit Medical 
Facility 
Name of Facility 
Doctor/PA/Nurse  
Reported 
Diagnosis 
Medication 
Prescribed 
 
 
Emergency 
Contact Person 
Notified?  
☐Yes     ☐ No       Name:  
Date and Time Contacted: 
Notes: 


Page 78:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 78 of 104 
Department of 
Global Education 
(DGE) Contacted? 
☐Yes   ☐ No      Name:  
Date and Time DGE Contacted: 
Notes:  
 
 
Insurance 
Contacted? 
☐Yes   ☐ No      Name:  
Date and Time Contacted: 
Claim #: 
Notes:  
 
Local Authorities 
Notified? 
☐Yes ☐No 
Date and Time Notified: 
Organization:  
Authority Name(s): 
Notes: 
 
Follow up Plan 
Details:  
 
_______________________________________________   __________________  


Page 79:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 79 of 104 
 
Signature of Reporting Chaperone 
Date 
File this International Incident Programs Report along with any 
accompanying reports/documents from local law enforcement, 
medical professionals and/or International Programs Witness 
Report via email if possible OR as soon as circumstances permit. 
Turn in the original report to the DGE as soon as you return to 
Boston. Incident reports require at least one witness signature, 
and where possible the signatures of all impacted participants.  
 
_______________________________________________   __________________  
 
Signature of Witness 
Date 
 
Signatures of those impacted: 
_______________________________________________   __________________  
 
 
Date 
 
_______________________________________________   __________________  
 
 
Date 
 
_______________________________________________   __________________  
 
 
Date 
 
 


Page 80:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 80 of 104 
 
SOAP NOTE 
SOAP Notes should be used for live documentation of all health-
related incidents requiring further monitoring and/or evacuation. 
SOAP Notes should be attached to the corresponding Incident 
Report. 
Subjective: What the patient tells you. Note the chief 
complaint(s): 
 
 
 
 
Objective: What you see; vital signs; general survey of patient: 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 81:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 81 of 104 
Assessment: What you think is going on; diagnosis presented by 
medical professional: 
 
 
 
Anticipated Problems: 
 
 
 
Plan: What will be done about it; Tests ordered, medications 
prescribed, follow up needed:  
 
 
 
_______________________________________________   __________________  
 
Signature of Reporting Chaperone 
Date 
File this SOAP Note along with any accompanying 
reports/documents from local law enforcement, medical 
professionals and/or International Programs Witness Report via 
email if possible OR as soon as circumstances permit. Turn in the 
original report to the DGE as soon as you return to Boston. 


Page 82:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 82 of 104 
 
INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMS WITNESS REPORT 
Witnesses shall use this form to provide a statement of their 
observations to accompany the Incident Report Form.  
Witness Statement of: ____________________________________________  
Phone Number: __________________________________________________  
Address: __________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Description of Incident: 
 
 
 
 
 
I believe the contents in this statement are true. 
 
_______________________________________________   __________________  
 
Witness Signature 
Date 


Page 83:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 83 of 104 
 
INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMS INCIDENT INVESTIGATION LOG 
This template can be used to take running notes during an 
investigation.  
Event  
Time  
Location  
Parties Involved  
Source of 
Information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 84:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 84 of 104 
Event  
Time  
Location  
Parties Involved  
Source of 
Information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________   __________________  
 
Signature of Investigator 
Date 
 
 


Page 85:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 85 of 104 
 
FIRE PREVENTION AND SAFETY PRACTICES 
International & Overnight Programs 
Fire safety plans on overnight and international programs differ 
from the procedures set for our schools. The laws that regulate 
fire prevention may differ from what exists in Massachusetts. The 
steps below must be followed on all overnight and international 
programs:  
1. Conduct A Fire Prevention Assessment  
The program leader must conduct a fire safety prevention 
assessment using the Fire Prevention and Safety Form 
(Attachment A) within 24 hours of arrival. Using the Fire 
Prevention and Safety Form, the program leader shall formulate 
a plan for the evacuation of all persons on the trip in the event of 
a fire or other emergency. This plan shall include alternate means 
of egress and should be created in consultation with an 
accommodation staff person, and if applicable, the third-party 
provider.  
 
2. Prepare Chaperone Team on Fire Prevention Strategy  
Based on the results from the Fire Prevention and Safety Form, 
the program leader should ensure that each staff member 
receives and understands the fire prevention landscape and has 


Page 86:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 86 of 104 
instructions on the fire drill procedure created for the 
accommodation. Questions to review include: 
A. What are the best means of egress in case of a fire? 
(Consider all rooms students and staff are staying in 
and all places where the group may congregate. Use 
the hotel’s posted evacuation routes if applicable.) 
B. Where is the designated meeting point? (This meeting 
point should be a safe distance from the building, but 
easy for the group to identify and locate.) 
C. Who is responsible for each student? (Attendance 
must be taken; if chaperone ratios permit, the lead 
chaperone should not be assigned to a group and 
should serve as contact person for emergency 
personnel.) 
D. What are some hazards that students and chaperones 
should be aware of? 
E. What happens in the case of a missing person?  
3. Review Prevention Strategy with Students and Conduct a 
Fire Drill 
The lead chaperone and the chaperone team will review the fire 
prevention strategy and conduct a fire drill (walkthrough) with 
the students within the first 24 hours of the trip. Conducting a 
fire drill (walkthrough) is important as participants are unfamiliar 
with the building. 
 
 


Page 87:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 87 of 104 
Instructions For Fire Drills 
Since each accommodation is different, each plan and drill will 
vary. Regardless of the accommodation, it is critical that a 
procedure is in place for evacuating the building, each chaperone 
knows their responsibilities, every student participates in the fire 
drill (walkthrough), and each person knows the meeting location 
when evacuated from the building. Please note: A fire drill as 
defined here is a walkthrough of the route the group will take to 
exit the premises in the event of an emergency. 
A few general instructions:  
• Evacuate immediately. 
• Do not use elevators during a fire evacuation. 
• Each student should walk to the designated meeting 
location outside of the building in a quiet and orderly 
manner. 
• Make sure all students know all possible exits from their 
area and that students know where the meeting location is 
outside of the building. 
• Fire drill plans must ensure adequate procedures for the 
emergency evacuation of students and staff with disabilities. 
(Have a staging location for students/staff with disabilities 
and make sure hotel/hostel personnel are also aware.)  
• Chaperones are responsible for students under their 
supervision and must take attendance. 
• Upon the evacuation of a building, no person or persons 
shall re-enter the building without the authorization of the 
lead chaperone. The lead chaperone, as a part of their fire 


Page 88:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 88 of 104 
drill procedures, must establish a command procedure for 
such evacuations. 
4. Conduct a Post-Fire Drill Debrief 
After the fire drill, the chaperone team should set aside time to 
debrief. Record response on Attachment A. 
 


Page 89:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 89 of 104 
 
FIRE PREVENTION AND SAFETY ASSESSMENT FORM 
Directions: For each accommodation, please complete and upon 
your return, file this form with other documents you are 
mandated to keep. Legally, these documents must be kept on file 
for the current fiscal year plus three additional years after the 
field trip has occurred.  
Building:        
Program Leader:  ___________________________________________  
Date of the Safety Prevention Assessment:  _________________  
Name/s of Staff and Their Titles Consulted for Assessment 
(accommodation staff/ program provider staff): 
 _____________________________________________________________  
 _____________________________________________________________  
Outside the Building:  
List the possible hazards in the area:  
 
Can the accommodation be accessed by a fire department 
or emergency teams?   
 ▢ YES ▢ NO  


Page 90:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 90 of 104 
Inside the Building: 
Equipment: 
Does the building have fire alarms?  
 
 
▢ YES ▢ NO 
Are there fire sprinklers?  
▢ YES ▢ NO 
If yes, where are they located? 
 
Is there adequate lighting in the corridors?  
▢ YES ▢ NO 
Are there clear exit signs?  
▢ YES ▢ NO 
Are there fire alarm pull stations?  
▢ YES ▢ NO 
Are the fire alarm pull stations visible and  
accessible?  
▢ YES ▢ NO 
Are there fire extinguishers?  
▢ YES ▢ NO  
If yes, where? 
 
Are there smoke detectors in the corridors and in every 
room where participants are staying? 
▢ YES ▢ NO 
 
 


Page 91:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 91 of 104 
Hazards: 
List the potential fire hazards at the site: 
 
Are there notable fire hazards such as open fire doors, 
accumulated trash, blocked corridors, locked exit doors, 
blocked stairways, burned out exit lights or missing/broken 
fire equipment?  
▢ YES ▢ NO 
Means of Evacuation/Egress 
Does the facility have an evacuation plan for each room? (If 
not, be sure that when you conduct a fire drill (walkthrough) 
that you develop a plan for leaving the room.) 
▢ YES ▢ NO 
What are the means of egress? 
  
Are there primary exits and alternate exits?  
▢ YES ▢ NO 
Note locations:  
 
 
 


Page 92:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 92 of 104 
Fire Drill/Walkthrough Plan: (Please record notes below.) 
 
 
Post-Drill Debrief: 
Date and Time of the Fire Drill:  ___________________________________  
 
Did the students and chaperones follow the procedures of the 
fire drill?  
▢ YES 
▢ NO  
If no, why not?  
 
 
Based on this debrief, either inform the students of your findings 
for adjustments, or if necessary, conduct another fire drill. Once 
the safety review and drill are completed, please sign below. 
 
________________________________________________   _________________  
 
Signature of Program Leader 
Date 
 
 
 


Page 93:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 93 of 104 
 
BPS STUDENT TRAVELER & FAMILY AGREEMENT FORM 
Overview: Positive behavior is a key expectation for students 
participating in domestic and international travel opportunities. 
Positive behavior reflects trustworthiness, respect, responsibility, 
ambassadorship, and service. Participants are expected to fully 
participate, follow all program guidelines, and behave 
appropriately to ensure a high-quality learning experience. 
Parent/guardians: please read this contract carefully with your 
student and sign it. Students: your signature on this contract 
seals your commitment to follow behavior expectations leading 
up to, and during your school trip. 
 __________________________________________________________________  
BEFORE I GO ON THE TRIP: (STUDENTS) 
● I understand that my acceptance to a trip prior to 
departure does not guarantee that I will be allowed to 
attend. 
● I have access to my school's handbook which includes all 
BPS and school rules and the BPS Code of Conduct. 
● I know that it is my responsibility to follow all BPS rules and 
guidelines set by the administrator or chaperone.  
● I will attend all mandatory pre-departure meetings and 
complete all mandatory paperwork. 
● I will not violate the BPS Code of Conduct. 


Page 94:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 94 of 104 
● I will not distribute or consume alcohol or drugs (including 
edibles), and/or encourage actions that are against the BPS 
Code of Conduct or law.  
● I will not pack any illegal or inappropriate items (i.e., items 
in violation of the BPS Code of Conduct, including, but not 
limited to: weapons, alcohol, edibles, drug paraphernalia).  
● I will be compliant with any guidelines set by the school, 
administrator, or chaperone regarding program 
expectations and any required materials, such as 
completed projects, journals, and service hours. 
● I know that if I do not act appropriately, or if I violate any 
rule, that there are consequences for my actions. Such 
consequences include, but are not limited to, not being 
allowed to participate in the international trip program.  
WHILE I AM ON THE TRIP: (STUDENTS) 
● I will not violate the BPS Code of Conduct  
● I will ask for help from the adults when needed. 
● I will treat my peers, all adults and all people with the 
utmost level of respect.  
● I will not purchase, distribute, or consume any illegal or 
inappropriate items; (i.e., items in violation of BPS Code of 
Conduct, including, but not limited to: weapons, pepper 
spray, alcohol, edibles, drug paraphernalia) even if these 
substances are legal in the state or foreign country, or I am 
of legal age in the foreign country.  


Page 95:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 95 of 104 
● I will use social media responsibly during the trip, and will 
not post or communicate any information regarding other 
students during an emergency situation. 
● I will abide by the established curfew, and sleep in my 
assigned bed, alone, and sleeping location each night. 
● I will not vandalize any property at any venue I visit (hotel, 
tour bus, tourist sites, homestay location).  
● I will obey the BPS dress code, as well as the suggested 
attire for the foreign country, and specific sites and 
locations within the foreign country I will visit.  
● I will not share any medication with anyone on the trip. 
● I will take medication prescribed for me by my doctor for 
required or recommended medical use while abroad (i.e., 
malaria pills, asthma inhaler, prescriptions for anxiety, 
depression). 
● I will not leave the group at any time unless specifically 
authorized to do so.  
● I will practice good common sense, respect, and 
consideration for others and their property. 
● I understand that I am responsible for keeping my passport, 
important belongings and other travel documents safe. 
● I understand that partaking in any illegal activity abroad 
can result in my arrest.  
● I understand that if an issue of any kind arises, my 
chaperone will address the issue, and their decision is final.  
● I know that if I do not act appropriately, or if I violate any 
rule, that there are consequences for my actions. Such 


Page 96:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 96 of 104 
consequences include, but are not limited to, being sent 
home at my parent/guardian's expense. 
 
PARENT/GUARDIANS/ STUDENTS AGE 18 OR OLDER:  
I fully understand the following conditions regarding student 
international travel with BPS:  
● The BPS Code of Conduct applies on all field trips. Following 
an investigation, if the program leader, in consult with the 
principal/head of school and central office staff, determines 
that a student’s conduct, while on an overnight trip, poses a 
risk to themselves or the safety of the group, or is no longer 
manageable by BPS staff in the field, the district reserves 
the right to request and arrange for that student to return 
home. The district also reserves the right to request that 
families assume responsibility for all or a portion of the 
costs associated with their child’s return. Students may be 
subject to further disciplinary action and will be provided 
the opportunity to have a formal hearing at the school level 
upon return.  
● If a student is to be dismissed from an 
international/overnight field trip due to behavior that 
violates the BPS Code of Conduct while participating in a 
domestic overnight or international trip, the student’s 
parent/guardian must be notified in advance and should 
agree to meet the student at the airport or other agreed 
upon destination. If the parent/guardian is not reachable, 
the student’s principal or appropriate school-based point of 
contact must be notified and agree to meet the student at 


Page 97:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 97 of 104 
the airport, or other agreed upon destination. Students 
under the age of 16 must be accompanied on their flight by 
a chaperone. Students over the age of 16 may fly 
unaccompanied, though a chaperone must accompany the 
student to the airport to ensure the student checks in for 
their flight. (Age requirements may be subject to specific 
airline/train/bus guidelines). Any costs assumed in this 
regard will be the responsibility of the parent/guardian.  
● Parents or students who sign contracts, and or agreements 
with third party company vendors, acknowledge that 
outside companies protocols and procedures might differ 
from BPS policies and procedures. Families should 
especially be aware of cancellation and refund policies. BPS 
is not responsible for money paid to third party vendors.  
● BPS reserves the right to cancel a trip at any time. Trip 
destinations that impose an immediate risk to our students 
will be canceled. In these instances all families will be 
notified immediately.  
 
(Families keep this page) 
 
 
 
 
(Program leaders keep this page.) 


Page 98:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 98 of 104 
STUDENT/GUARDIAN STATEMENT OF UNDERSTANDING  
We have read and understand the BPS Student Traveler & Family 
Agreement Form. We understand what is expected of the 
prospective student traveler and feel that we, the 
parent/guardian and student, can commit to these expectations.  
 
PARENT/GUARDIAN (Print Name) ________________________________  
PARENT/GUARDIAN (Signature) __________________________________  
DATE: ____________________________ 
PHONE NUMBER: ________________________________   
STUDENT (Print Name) ___________________________________________   
STUDENT (Signature) _____________________________________________  
DATE: ____________________________ 
PHONE NUMBER: ________________________________   
 
 
(STUDENTS RETURN THIS PAGE TO YOUR PROGRAM LEADER) 
 


Page 99:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 99 of 104 
 
BPS CHAPERONE AGREEMENT FORM 
This form is to be completed by all chaperones of BPS Sponsored 
field trips and submitted to the program leader (lead chaperone). 
School Name:  ____________________________________________________  
Destination: ______________________________________________________  
Departure Date: __________________ Return Date __________________  
 
All chaperones must agree to abide by the following code of 
conduct to participate in a BPS sponsored field trip.  
SAFETY & RESPONSIBILITY 
I understand that my safety, and the safety of other participants 
is extremely important during this field trip, and I agree to make 
safety my first priority. I agree to conduct myself in a manner that 
promotes my safety, and the safety of others at all times. I 
understand that maintaining students’ safety requires that 
students must be supervised by me and/or other chaperones at 
all times while students are engaged in field trip activities. For 
overnight and international field trips, I understand that 
nighttime curfews, and room checks for students, as well as 
morning wake up calls for students are part of my responsibility. I 


Page 100:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 100 of 104 
agree to follow BPS policies, protocols, and guidance of BPS staff 
when in the field.  
DRUG & ALCOHOL POLICY  
I understand that the BPS Code of Conduct prohibits students 
from possessing, using, selling and/or distributing any of the 
following on all domestic and international field trips: 
Alcohol; marijuana, non-prescribed controlled substances, 
imitation controlled substances, inhalants, other intoxicants, 
controlled or drug paraphernalia; unauthorized possession, use or 
distribution of over the counter medication, and selling of 
prescription drugs. The Code also prohibits the use of tobacco 
products (including e-cigarettes, hookah paraphernalia, and 
vapor cigarettes). I understand that these prohibitions apply to all 
students, regardless of age.  
I understand that I am forbidden to use or visibly be in possession 
of tobacco in the presence of students. I also understand that the 
use of all other drugs, including alcohol, and weapons are strictly 
prohibited on the field trip.  
 
Chaperone Name (Printed):  ______________________________________  
Chaperone Name (Signature):  ___________________________________  
Date: _____________________________ 
 
CAO-25: INTERNATIONAL TRIP REQUEST 


Page 101:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 101 of 104 
Attachment: Nurse Verification Form 
OVERVIEW & INSTRUCTIONS 
This is a mandatory risk management procedure. Please 
complete this form at least 10 weeks prior to departure.  
It is BPS’ goal that you are in the strongest position to support 
each student’s health while abroad. Program leaders must review 
all students’ medical forms and consult with the school nurse to 
ensure all documents are accurately completed.   
Please note: the school nurse does not “clear” students for travel 
but will provide trip leaders/chaperones with guidance in 
supporting students medically while traveling. Program leaders 
shall consult with, and when necessary, receive training from and 
obtain written comments from the school nurse regarding any 
students who have expressed medical needs (e.g., medication, 
asthma, allergies, etc.).  
It is important for program leaders and chaperones to know that 
many students and families omit medical information from 
permission slips for a variety of reasons, and in some cases 
Program leaders discover medical conditions that the nurse was 
not aware of. Therefore, it becomes a collective duty to ensure 
that we have the most up to date medical information for all 
student travelers. Program leaders should actively discuss the 
importance of honesty and full medical disclosure with students 
and families at one of the pre-departure meetings.  
School nurses can assist with the following (list is not limited to 
what is below): 


Page 102:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 102 of 104 
● A student's current medical status/current immunization 
record  
● Background information regarding a particular medical 
condition 
● Specific medication instructions and training for 
medication application if necessary  
● Epi Pen instructions  
● Can help determine appropriate trip accommodations and 
considerations for the student traveler  
● Can further consult with outside medical professionals who 
are involved with the student’s medical needs. i.e. social 
workers, occupational therapist and the child’s primary care 
physician.  
Program leaders must provide the nurse with the following 
information and a student traveler roster: Trip destination, dates, 
and draft itinerary. The Nurse Verification Form to follow must 
be submitted 10 weeks prior to departure. It may be mailed or 
scanned to DGE. For additional questions please contact Kayla 
Dorsey-Twumasi, Director of Global Educcation. 
 
 


Page 103:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 103 of 104 
CAO-25: INTERNATIONAL TRIP REQUEST 
ATTACHMENT: NURSE VERIFICATION FORM 
School/trip Name:   _______________________________________________  
Trip Destination:  _________________________________________________  
Dates of Travel:  __________________________________________________  
Trip Leader Name: ______________________________________________ 
School Nurse Name:  _____________________________________________  
School Nurse Phone Number:  ____________________________________  
School Nurse Email: ____________________ @Bostonpublicshools.org 
PROGRAM LEADER: 
Please sign this form to verify that you have consulted with your 
school nurse regarding your student traveler roster, retain a copy 
for your file, and submit the original to the department of global 
education. 
Your signature indicates that you read and understand the 
policies in this circular and that they have been/will be followed. 
Additionally, your signature indicates that you have read and 
understand the nurse verification protocol.   
________________________________________________   _________________  
 
Signature of Trip Leader  
Date 


Page 104:
 
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-25 
Page 104 of 104 
SCHOOL NURSE 
Your signature indicates that the above trip leader has shared the 
proposed international trip, student traveler roster, and medical 
forms with you. If they have completed this mandatory step, 
please sign below to verify that.   
 
________________________________________________   _________________  
 
Signature of School Nurse  
Date 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-08 
Version 01 
 
 
 
GRADING REQUIREMENTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The spirit of this policy is to move away from the practice of 
grading non-academic behavior and to the timely provision of 
meaningful feedback to every family on every student’s 
academic progress. This policy is a critical part of propelling all 
students toward the Strategic Plan and School Committee goals 
centered on college, career, and life readiness. As well, it will 
ensure that grading practices are accurate, bias-resistant, 
motivational, and coherent in the district, which will in turn 
ensure the ability of our stakeholders to trust the district’s 
commitment to equity. This policy will provide accurate, 
dignifying feedback to every student about where they are 
academically and what they need to be successful. As a vehicle 
for closing opportunity and achievement gaps, the grading policy 
will provide clear and comprehensive guidance that aligns to our 
teaching practices, family engagement, and student experience, 
grounded in equity and research. With the School Committee's 
approval of this policy, the Academics and Schools divisions will 
work in collaboration with our stakeholders this spring to finalize 
and enact an implementation plan that focuses on the adaptive 
work ahead.  
The Boston Public Schools will at all times maintain 
Superintendent’s Circulars that: (1) outline procedures for 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-08 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 
maintenance of grades to ensure that they are accurate, timely, 
and aligned to DESE standards; (2) outline a common report card 
structure and timeline for schools by grade span and program; 
and (3) outline allowable flexibilities.  
Separately, as a companion to this policy, the district will develop 
and maintain detailed implementation processes in the form of 
Superintendent’s Circulars ensuring:  
1. Implementation of MassCore graduation requirements and 
waivers 
2. Common GPA calculation and transcription processes 
3. A common process for promotion to the next grade level 
4. A common process for retention at the current grade level 
5. A common and public course catalog that details for 
students and families course of study options for all 
secondary schools as well as course descriptions, credit, and 
governance 
6. An updated process and calendar for course creation.  
ADOPTION OF A COMMON GRADING POLICY FOR THE BOSTON 
PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
The School Committee of the Boston Public Schools is 
responsible for creating policies and practices that support the 
preparation of every student to be college, career, and life-ready 
and remove barriers that interfere with students graduating from 
BPS ready to succeed in the next stage of their lives. If we 
support BPS educators to effectively use culturally responsive 
practices, provide high levels of support, and adopt coherent 
grading practices that are mathematically accurate, bias-
resistant, and motivational for students, then we will see 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-08 
Page 3 of 6 
 
 
increased student engagement, and grades that reflect student 
learning. 
BPS will adopt the following policy for all students in the district. 
Specifically, the following practices will be required of all 
educators in the district.  
PROPOSED: 
Grading Practice 
Why is it more equitable?  
Accuracy and timeliness Educators will ensure that term grades follow 
the practices laid out in the BPS Grading Policy 
and are posted in Aspen by the closing date 
according to the district grading calendar.  
“No Credit” grades will 
no longer be given. 
As an alternative, schools may mark a student 
with an “incomplete” to enable equitable 
learning recovery. 
In all cases, a student not earning a passing 
grade must be given the opportunity and 
responsibility to equitably recover any learning 
loss or make up for the work missed within one 
marking period. 
No penalties will be 
given for late work. 
Deadlines will be given for work, and we expect 
students to meet these expectations. Deadlines 
will be explained to students.  When a student 
turns in the assignment, it will be graded, and 
the grade in ASPEN/SMS will reflect student 
mastery (not the tardiness of the work). 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-08 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 
Grading Practice 
Why is it more equitable?  
A minimum grading (50 
for an assignment on a 
0-100 scale) will be used. 
 
Teachers will determine minimum grades for 
assignments where the lowest possible grade is 
balanced with the value of the highest grade. 
Best practices would include the 
implementation of a consistent numerical 
grading scale (0-4, 1-7, etc.) that aligns to GPA 
scale. 
Demonstration of 
competency in 
summative tasks must 
make up at least 80% of 
term grades. 
Grades for assignments should be 
representative of what students have 
demonstrated in terms of their learning, and 
not non-academic behaviors.  
Students will receive 
consistent feedback on 
assignments before 
students are formally 
assessed.  
Teachers are intentional about taking time to 
give students clear and actionable feedback. 
Students understand what the criteria for 
success are for any given assignment and have 
clear actions steps for getting there. We 
understand the importance of coherence in the 
ways we provide feedback and are committed 
to making this an instructional focus for the 
upcoming school year to better support our 
staff. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-08 
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
Grading Practice 
Why is it more equitable?  
Middle/High School: A 
consistent, agreed-upon 
number of assignments 
per grade; and 
consistent intervals for 
grading updates in 
Aspen/SMS. 
Teachers are expected to post at least one 
visible grade on ASPEN/SMS every week for 
middle and high school students.  
Elementary School: A 
consistent approach 
across all content areas 
(including speciality 
classes) for providing 
students and families 
formative feedback 
routinely. 
Schools serving elementary grades are required 
to have a consistent approach for providing 
students and families formative feedback 
weekly. Students are required to receive term 
grades for Language Arts, Math, History/Social 
Studies, Science, and any specialty classes 
offered.  
All grade levels 
Students may only receive a composite grade 
for “Humanities” or “STEM” or equivalent if the 
course is offered at the equivalent of a double 
block. As well, students must receive formative 
and summative feedback on both grade level 
language arts and history/social studies or math 
and science concepts and meet all the 
requirements above.  
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-08 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Elementary Superintendent 
Department: 
Academics and Professional Learning 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington St. Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-6053 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-24 
Version 01 
 
 
OVERNIGHT FIELD TRIP GUIDELINES 
 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
 
IMPORTANT NOTE: These guidelines might be impacted by COVID-19 
restrictions and are subject to change based on public health, 
international security, or other emergent issues that could impact travel. 
For the most up-to-date information and guidance, contact 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org for assistance/guidance.  
 
 
This Superintendent’s Circular provides instructions for 
implementing the Field Trip Policy passed by the Boston School 
Committee on November 20, 2019. 
This circular should be read AFTER the Superintendent’s Circular 
No. CAO-22, General Guidelines and Procedures for All Field Trips 
as additional guidelines are outlined there. 
The principal/head of school and/or the district department 
sponsoring the trip are responsible for ensuring that all field trip 
policies and procedures as outlined in this circular are adhered 
to. 
Together, the principal/head of school and/or the district 
department lead sponsoring the trip and the program leader 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 2 of 80 
 
 
must review and complete checklists for this circular. Signed 
checklists must be kept on file at the school/district department. 
OVERNIGHT FIELD TRIP: Any domestic trip off school grounds that 
involves students’ participation overnight. 
● Overnight Field Trip forms are submitted to the 
principal/head of school AT LEAST 12 weeks in advance and 
approved by the principal/head of school. 
● All forms, including the signed CAO-24 checklist form, are 
filed at the school. 
● Overnight Field Trip Request form, the list of student names, 
emergency contact name and number, grade, D.O.B, the list 
of chaperone names and their role in the school community, 
the itinerary, and if applicable, train and flight information 
are sent to the district to notify the district of trip plans AT 
LEAST 4 weeks in advance. Scan and email the Overnight 
Field Trip Request form and information to the appropriate 
principal/ leader as well as to the Department of Global 
Education. Please follow up to ensure documentation has 
been received. 
 
OVERNIGHT FIELD TRIP CHECKLIST 
 Review Superintendent’s Circular No. CAO-22, General 
Guidelines and Procedures for All Field Trips. 
 All field trip IDEAS must be preliminarily approved in writing 
by the principal/head of school or District Department 
sponsoring the trip prior to the distribution of any 
informational materials on the proposed trip to students 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 3 of 80 
 
 
and their parents/guardians and prior to any fundraising or 
other detailed preparations. Consult with the principal/head 
of school on potential chaperones and student recruitment. 
 Review Superintendent’s Circular FSE-05 Medical 
Emergency Management and SAF-04 Incident Data 
Reporting and Release for important safety protocols. The 
Department of Global Education should be used as a 
resource for questions regarding risk management on 
overnight field trips. 
 Select a site and investigate the appropriateness of the site 
in relation to the category of field trip. 
 Select a date and an alternate date. Note: Check with the 
principal/head of school, teachers, and staff to ensure that 
trips are not scheduled on dates that interfere with 
important tests, religious holidays, or class work. 
 
PLANNING PROCESS 
For thorough planning and to maximize affordability and 
fundraising efforts, it is recommended that overnight trips are 
planned at least six months in advance. 
 
ROLE OF THE PROGRAM LEADER (LEAD CHAPERONE) 
Program Leader Description: The program leader is a BPS 
employee and the lead chaperone organizing and leading the 
trip. All program leaders (lead chaperones and the BPS employee 
organizing and leading the trip) and chaperones must be 
approved by the principal/head of school or district department 
sponsoring the trip. The program leader is responsible for 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 4 of 80 
 
 
ensuring all guidelines in CAO-22 and CAO-24 are followed and 
keeping the principal/head of school and the district informed of 
trip developments. The program leader is responsible for 
completing the Overnight Field Trip Request form and 
accompanying documents that are submitted to the 
principal/head of school for approval. The program leader is also 
responsible for organizing the chaperone team, student team, 
and pre-departure meetings. 
 School Nurse and Guidance Counselor Consultation: Before 
approval of a field trip, the program leader must consult 
with the school leader to determine if, and what type of 
medical assistance is needed for participating students. To 
ensure accessibility, this step is crucial, and must take place 
before the field trip is secured. For additional questions, 
please consult the Health Services Department. Additionally, 
to thoroughly support a student's participation in a field trip, 
consult with and, when necessary, receive training from the 
school nurse regarding any students who have medical 
needs at least six weeks before departure (much longer for 
international and overnight field trip programs). Also consult 
with the school counselor regarding mental and behavioral 
health needs. If any student has a serious medical or mental 
health condition, be sure that their doctor is aware of the 
essential participation criteria and location of the trip and 
writes a letter indicating that the child may safely attend 
and participate in trip activities. Keep this document on file 
with other key permissions slips and medical forms. 
 Overnight Field Trip Form: Complete and submit an 
Overnight Field Trip Request form and accompanying 
documents to obtain official consent from the 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 5 of 80 
 
 
principal/head of school to execute the trip. Once the 
principal/head of school has approved the trip, you must 
send a copy of the request, itinerary, and supporting 
documents to the Department of Global Education. 
 Mindset: Planning, organization, and preparation are critical 
to a successful experience for all participants. As part of trip 
planning and itinerary development, ensure the major 
aspects of health, safety, student inclusion, and security 
have been addressed with due diligence. Program leaders 
must be able to articulate in an informed manner what 
decisions were made, why they were made, and the sources 
that informed that decision making. If you have questions 
about the appropriateness of an activity, please consult with 
your principal/head of school and the Department of Global 
Education. 
 School File: Create a school file to house all important 
documents: Overnight Field Trip Request form and 
attachments, student roster, student permission slips, and 
medical forms, and other signed documents including 
incident reports, incident log, and the fire safety plan. These 
documents must be kept on file for the current fiscal year 
plus three additional years after the trip has occurred. 
 Communication: Share the trip details listed below with all 
teachers, nurses, and other staff members so that they may 
plan accordingly. 
o Trip overview (purpose) 
o Destination 
o Date of trip 
o Students’ names 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 6 of 80 
 
 
o Chaperones’ names and roles in school community 
 Documentation: Prepare and distribute the Parental 
Authorization for Overnight Field Trip form, Medical 
Information form, Student Traveler Behavior Contract, 
Student Support for Overnight Programs, and the 
Medication Administration form to each participating 
student and chaperone. For preparedness and safety, you 
also must have these medical forms from chaperones. If 
applicable, prepare and distribute the Notarized 
Parent/Guardian Airline Travel Consent form. (Some airlines 
and travel companies require this; some do not. Research 
your particular trip to see if this applies.) 
 Meetings: Conduct AT LEAST TWO pre-departure student 
meetings. Discuss the trip’s educational purpose and goals, 
conduct expectations, itinerary, healthy travel, and all other 
logistics of the program. (For lengthy overnight programs, 
see CAO-25 for additional student meeting topics.) Conduct 
AT LEAST ONE parent/guardian meeting (with each family 
or all families together) to review the purpose of the trip, 
itinerary, review/sign permission forms, review logistics of 
travel, and share medical and safety information. 
Please note: Plan for families who may need translation 
services at the meeting; students should not serve as their 
parent/guardian’s translator at this meeting. If a 
parent/guardian is unable to attend the meeting, a 
chaperone (a BPS employee) must be sure to speak to the 
parent/guardian via telephone or in-person about the trip 
prior to taking the student on an overnight trip. Document 
this personal contact for your records. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 7 of 80 
 
 
SAFETY PREPAREDNESS 
 Travel Advisories/Warnings: The head of school and 
superintendent reserve the right to cancel any field trip up 
to and including the day of departure to manage risk. 
 Insurance: Through On Call International insurance, the 
district provides medical coverage for international and 
domestic BPS-sponsored trips (domestic being 100 driven 
miles away from home or place of study or employment) for 
BPS students, BPS staff participants, and chaperones. On 
Call will serve as the primary source for medical insurance. 
However, in some cases, if a hospital visit is required, 
students may be required to pay out of pocket, and be 
reimbursed by On Call later. Families will want to budget for 
this just-in-case expense. The On Call insurance policy does 
NOT include cancellation or trip interruption insurance 
should the trip be canceled or interrupted for any reason 
other than medical. Cancellation/interruption must be due 
to the traveler getting sick, injured, or someone in the 
traveler’s immediate family being sick, injured, or death. 
Students/families would need to show proof of a 
sickness/injury; and the sickness/injury must be so disabling 
as to cause them to cancel/interrupt their trip. If there is a 
sickness/death for their family member, they would need to 
show proof of that, too. Save all receipts for flights/lodging 
for reimbursement purposes and a claim form would need 
to be filled out. Families will need to know in advance that 
Trip Cancellation has a $2,000 limit, and Trip Interruption 
has a $2,500 limit. Again, the superintendent reserves the 
right to cancel a trip for any reason and at any time for 
safety purposes; Cancel for Any Reason Insurance (CFAR) is 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 8 of 80 
 
 
NOT provided by the district. Therefore, all trip participants 
must purchase their own (CFAR) insurance to protect their 
trip investment. 
 Training: It is recommended that at least two chaperones 
(including the program leader) hold valid CPR AND first aid 
certification. First Aid: Ensure the availability of a first aid kit. 
Verify emergency and medical information and contact 
details. 
 Chaperone Ratios: For overnight trips, the student-to- 
chaperone ratio is 7:1, with a two-chaperone minimum. It is 
recommended that a chaperone reserve, or backup, be 
identified in the event a chaperone is no longer able to 
participate at the last minute or must leave the field. Tour 
guides, or employees of third-party vendors contracted to 
help operate the trip, are not considered chaperones, and 
do not factor into the student to chaperone ratio. 
 Transportation: School buses or BPS-approved 
transportation vendors’ vehicles MUST be used to transport 
students to and from field trips or athletic events, regardless 
of how the trip is paid for. Privately owned vehicles, vehicles 
from non-approved vendors, ride-sharing transportation 
services such as Uber and Lyft, or leased vans are not to be 
utilized to transport students to and from field trips or 
athletic events, except in the case of a bona fide emergency. 
Refer to TRN-03 and CAO-22 for information and regulations 
on field trip transportation. 
 Water Activities: If your trip involves any activities in or on 
the water, you must contact the Department of Global 
Education for approval at least 16 weeks in advance. There is 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 9 of 80 
 
 
a separate and mandatory procedure for all trips involving 
water. Please review CAO-27 and contact the Department of 
Global Education immediately. 
 Healthy Travelers: Be sure students have had a recent 
(current school year) doctor’s visit and physical exam prior to 
departure. Students and staff should be current on all 
immunizations and vaccinations, including those related to 
the location they will be traveling to. Travelers should 
consult with their primary care doctor and can also visit the 
Center for Disease Control’s website for information on 
staying healthy while traveling at 
http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/. If any student has a serious 
medical condition, please be sure that their doctor writes a 
letter indicating that the child may safely attend and 
participate in trip activities. 
 
CHAPERONE CRITERIA 
 Chaperone Recruitment: Program leaders must consult 
with the principal/head of school on potential chaperones 
and student recruitment. The program leader (lead 
chaperone) must be a BPS employee. Other authorized 
chaperones may include parents and guardians who are 
required to be 21 years of age or older. Any parent on the trip 
must operate in the role of chaperone. All chaperones must 
be approved by the head of school/principal. Every effort 
should be made for students to have access to the field trip 
experience, for chaperones to be representative of the 
student group, and for chaperones to include males and 
females. The selection and approval of chaperones by the 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 10 of 80 
 
 
principal/head of school should be based on the individuals’ 
thorough knowledge of and rapport with most of the 
student participants. Choose a chaperone team purposefully 
and wisely, considering strengths. Every adult on the trip 
must be a chaperone and have a clear role. 
 Non-BPS Chaperones: Other authorized chaperones may 
include parents and volunteers who are required to be 21 
years of age or older. All non-BPS employee chaperones 
must submit a yearly CORI/SORI authorization form to the 
Office of Human Capital. Complete the eCORI form online. 
Contact the BPS Office of Human Capital (OHC) for CORI 
check and confirmation support. The principal/head of 
school and the lead chaperone are responsible for 
submitting authorization forms to OHC and must not allow 
chaperones to take part in activities until they have been 
CORI/SORI cleared. Non-BPS employees who chaperone on 
a field trip are not covered for liability by the Boston Public 
Schools. The program leader must be sure that all 
chaperones, including non-BPS chaperones, are familiar 
with the BPS Code of Conduct and other district and school- 
based rules. 
 BPS Parent Chaperones: Chaperones who are 
parents/guardians of BPS students on the trip must provide 
the same level of care and attention to ALL student 
participants. If a BPS chaperone’s child who does not attend 
the participating school must attend the program, the child 
must be a BPS student and in the same grade or age range 
as participating students. In this case, the BPS parent 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 11 of 80 
 
 
chaperone is responsible for incurring all costs associated 
with their child’s participation. 
● All chaperones must complete the Chaperone 
Agreement form. 
● Non-BPS employees who chaperone on a field trip are 
not covered for liability by the Boston Public Schools. 
● Refer to CAO-22 for additional chaperone criteria. 
 
STUDENT ACCESSIBILITY AND PARTICIPATION 
 Essential Criteria: The program leader and principal/head of 
school shall work together to establish essential 
participation criteria for the trip that informs students and 
parents of all activities and risks associated with each 
itinerary activity and trip location, to determine what 
accommodations or modifications may need to be made for 
the student to successfully and safely participate in all or 
portions of the trip. 
 Recruitment: Students not enrolled in the Boston Public 
Schools may not participate. Once on the field trip, student 
participants are not permitted to leave the group to visit 
friends, relatives etc., and rejoin the group. Students must 
remain with the group at all times. Field trips must be 
advertised to all students (within the whole school, 
particular grade, class/subject, club, or program associated 
with the trip), regardless of their financial situation. Schools 
shall make every reasonable effort to make instructional 
field trips affordable for all students. A student’s ability to 
pay may not be a criterion for field trip participation. Trips 
must be advertised to all students (within the school, 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 12 of 80 
 
 
particular grade, class, or program associated with the trip), 
regardless of their financial situation. 
 Accommodations: Students with English Learner status, 504 
plans, and/or IEPs cannot be denied access to field trips due 
to their status, or ability. It is the responsibility of the school 
to ensure that all accommodations normally provided to a 
student as indicated in their educational plans are made 
available during a field trip, including medication. See 
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-8 for information about 
medical dispensation on field trips. Participating students’ 
IEP or 504 plan shall be available to any staff coordinating 
and/or participating in the field trip. If any student has a 
serious medical, or mental health condition, please be sure 
that their doctor is aware of the essential participation 
criteria and location of the trip and writes a letter indicating 
that the child may safely attend and participate in trip 
activities. Keep this document on file with other key 
permissions slips and medical forms. 
 Inclusivity: Program leaders must consider their student 
demographics when selecting field trip locations, sites, and 
activities. Specifically determine the impact the locations, 
sites, and activities may have on diverse populations such as 
students of color, EL students, students who identify with 
the LGBTQ community, students with disabilities, those who 
may be in the minority during your field trip experience, and 
those students who belong to groups that have experienced 
marginalization in the location being visited. Program 
leaders must (1) work to prepare students for sensitive 
experiences, and (2) ensure that the program is safe and 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 13 of 80 
 
 
inclusive for all students. Consult the Department of Global 
Education for resources if needed. 
 Inclusive Rooming: The program leader and principal/head 
of school shall work with transgender and gender 
nonconforming students to provide accommodations 
(including rooming) that affirm the student’s gender 
identity while also ensuring safety. Program leaders should 
work with students and families to make sure all travel 
documents (airline tickets, passport) reflect their legal 
names as listed on government-issued identification, while 
all unofficial documents and materials may reflect the 
student’s preferred name. Please view additional rooming 
guidelines from the Office of Equity here. BPS students and 
parents are required to sign a BPS Student Traveler & Family 
Agreement form regarding student conduct while 
participating in a BPS sponsored field trip. Participation in 
field trips may be denied to any student who has 
demonstrated disregard for the policies and rules of BPS or 
the school prior to the field trip. Parents/guardians and 
students must be made aware of this policy in advance and 
communicated with throughout any processes involving 
their child not participating in a field trip. 
 Student Dismissal: Following an investigation, if the 
program leader, in consultation with the principal/head of 
school and Central Office staff, determines that a student’s 
conduct while on an overnight trip, poses a risk to 
themselves, or the safety of the group, or is no longer 
manageable by BPS staff in the field, the district reserves 
the right to request, and make arrangements for that 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 14 of 80 
 
 
student to return home. The district also reserves the right 
to request that families assume responsibility for all or a 
portion of the costs associated with their child’s return. 
Students may be subject to further disciplinary action and 
will be provided the opportunity to have a formal hearing at 
the school level upon return. The school must document the 
parent/guardian’s consent of this policy prior to the trip. 
If a student is to be dismissed from an overnight field trip, 
the student’s parent/guardian must be notified in advance 
and should agree to meet the student at the airport or other 
agreed-upon destination. If the parent/guardian is not 
reachable, the student’s principal or appropriate school- 
based point of contact must be notified and agree to meet 
the student at the airport or other agreed-upon destination. 
Students under the age of 16 must be accompanied on their 
flight by a chaperone. Students over the age of 16 may fly 
unaccompanied, though a chaperone must accompany the 
student to the airport to ensure the student checks in for 
their flight. (Age requirements may be subject to specific 
airline/train/bus guidelines.) Any costs assumed in this 
regard will be the responsibility of the parent/guardian. 
 Attendance: Provisions must be made in advance for any 
student not attending the trip and staying at school. If 
applicable, provide alternative arrangements and/or 
comparable activities for students not attending the trip or 
unable to participate in a portion of your trip. If a student’s 
family elects for their child not to attend a field trip for any 
reason, the child may not be penalized through their grade 
or otherwise. Attendance forms should indicate when a 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 15 of 80 
 
 
student is physically absent from the school building on a 
field trip but participating in a school-sponsored program 
being conducted off school grounds. (Note: It is important to 
know and document where students are at all times. 
 
PRE-DEPARTURE CONFIRMATION CHECK 
 
Eight Weeks (or More) Prior to Your Trip: 
 Develop transportation plans: mode of transportation, travel 
time, cost, etc. (If applicable, be sure to note how and with 
whom the child will travel to and from a field trip’s 
departure and pick-up locations.) 
 Review all students’ medical forms with the school nurse 
and school counselor to ensure all documents are 
completed, to support each student’s health during the trip. 
(Please note: nurses and counselors do not “clear” students 
for travel but will provide chaperones with guidance in 
supporting students while traveling.) Consult with and, 
when necessary, receive training from and obtain written 
comments from the school nurse and counselor regarding 
any students who have expressed medical needs (e.g., 
medication, asthma, allergies, etc.). 
 If your trip is less than 100 driving miles in distance, please 
ensure ALL students have valid medical insurance that 
covers them while on this program. Record details of 
insurance on the Medical Information Form. 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 16 of 80 
 
 
Five Weeks (or More) Prior to the Field Trip: 
 Contact the field trip site and ensure that the necessary 
arrangements are still in place. 
 Collect the completed and signed Parental Authorization for 
Overnight Trip, Medical Information, and Medication 
Administration forms from each participating student and 
chaperone and ensure that copies of all forms (and the 
itinerary) are submitted to the principal/head of school. 
* Contact the Department of Global Education for the 
Informed Consent Template to be tailored for your trip and 
then shared with families. 
 If necessary, collect the Notarized Parent/Guardian Airline 
Travel Consent form. 
 Hold a chaperone team meeting to distribute trip 
responsibilities and to review the student team. 
 Review students’ permission slips and medical forms; 
prepare any questions for follow-up with families and the 
school nurse. 
 The lead chaperone will record the names of the chaperones 
and whom each chaperone is supervising; each chaperone 
must carry this list. 
 Chaperones will organize a buddy system, pairing students 
with one another for safety purposes. 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 17 of 80 
 
 
 The lead chaperone will prepare trip binder for all 
chaperones (see During the Trip section which lists all 
binder contents). 
 Notify the appropriate principal leader and the Department 
of Global Education of your overnight travel plans by 
scanning and emailing the Overnight Field Trip Request 
Form at least four weeks in advance. 
 
Two Weeks (or More) Prior to the Field Trip: 
 If applicable, inform the food service manager or attendant 
of the names of the students going on the trip and the date 
and time of the field trip. 
 Verify all arrangements, including transportation and 
reception at the site. 
 Contact parents/guardians via telephone or in-person to 
review the final details of travel and verify emergency, 
medical and safety information, and contact details. Be sure 
families have copies of their child’s permission and medical 
forms as well as the trip itinerary and contact details. 
 Notify/consult with the principal/head of school (and 
Department of Global Education) if trip plans have changed 
from the original field trip request. 
 
COMMUNICATION PLAN 
 For Domestic Overnight Trips: The principal/head of school 
(or designee) is the emergency contact for program leaders 
and must be notified in the event of a serious medical 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 18 of 80 
 
 
emergency or other emergency event. The Department of 
Global Education should be used as a resource for questions 
regarding safety on trips, and for support with insurance 
support and claims. Prior to departure, program leaders will 
receive emergency contact information. 
 Phone Service Coverage: Program leaders must have cell 
phone coverage for the duration of the trip for 
communication with BPS and families in the event of an 
emergency. This cell phone must be on at all times so you 
may be contacted in case of an emergency. If this is not 
possible due to your location, please arrange a 
communication plan with the Department of Global 
Education. Program leaders must carry the phone numbers 
for the principal/head of school or sponsoring district 
department and the Department of Global Education. You 
are required to call anytime there is an emergency. 
 District Communication: Codify a clear communication plan 
with your principal/head of school or sponsoring district 
department prior to departure. You must check-in via phone 
call, text, or email upon arrival, every 48 hours, whenever the 
itinerary significantly changes, whenever you expect to lose 
cell/email coverage, upon departure, and upon safe return. 
You MUST check-in via phone when there is an incident. 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 19 of 80 
 
 
Definitions of communication types and expectations: 
Green Communication: No immediate concern. 
Program leader: notifies principal about arrival, departure, 
changes in itinerary, loss of connectivity, highlights of 
programs, photos. *Check in daily via text, phone call, email. 
Yellow Communication: A Yellow Call is a reportable 
situation or event, but no threat to life, limb, eyesight, or 
potential for severe emotional trauma. The incident is 
managed effectively in the field by program leader, but 
could devolve into a serious or critical incident, and requires 
attention from BPS on-call staff. 
Program leader: (1) notifies principal; (2) documents Incident 
SOAP Report; (3) monitors; (4) updates on-call BPS staff. 
Red Communication: Critical, violent, time-sensitive 
incident, illness, injury; or event that resulted in the loss of 
OR potential loss of life, limb, eyesight. 
Requires IMMEDIATE RESPONSE of program leader: 
(1) notifies principal; (2) alerts local medical assistance and/or 
law enforcement; (3) documents Incident SOAP Report; 
(4) monitors; (5) updates on-call BPS staff. 
 Communication with Families: Call students the night 
before travel to ensure transportation to the departure 
location is set, remind students to bring travel documents, 
and answer last-minute student and family questions. Set 
expectations regarding communication during travel 
between chaperones/student travelers, and the 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 20 of 80 
 
 
principal/families. Families must know who to call 24/7 in 
case of an emergency. 
 
DURING THE FIELD TRIP PROGRAM 
 On the day of the trip, take attendance and leave the current 
list of students attending the trip with the principal/head of 
school. If applicable, record a specific bus number and 
driver’s name and leave this information with the 
principal/head of school and share with all chaperones and, if 
age-appropriate, students. 
 Team Safety: If you believe conditions are unsafe, or 
unhealthy at any point on the trip, it is the program leader’s 
responsibility to make adjustments in the interest of 
group/individual safety. Consult your principal/head of 
school and the Department of Global Education during the 
trip when you have questions regarding trip safety. 
 Conduct Safety Reviews with Students in the Field: The 
following topics must be reviewed with students: 
 Program leaders conduct a fire and safety assessment 
and fire drill (Fire Prevention and Safety Instructions) 
when you arrive at EACH NEW accommodation. Share 
with the chaperone team the “Assessment” and 
prepare for orientation and fire drill. 
 Share evacuation plan and emergency plans: Discuss 
where students go during an emergency or otherwise? 
Discuss where students go if they are separated from 
the group during an activity. 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 21 of 80 
 
 
 Ensure students have a list of the key addresses 
(hotel/chaperone information) and emergency 
information as well as copies of all travel documents. 
Share where you are staying (room number if 
applicable) and how to reach you on the trip. 
 Conduct in-country orientation for conduct and 
cultural expectations. Set expectations for phone usage 
and social media. This is especially critical during an 
emergency. 
 Conduct safety orientations for service learning 
projects where teams work to construct, alter, and/or 
repair structures, including painting and decorating, 
and for agricultural projects, chaperones with the 
support of program providers, must conduct a safety 
orientation at the beginning of each activity. 
 
Student Debriefs/Reflections: 
 Conduct morning briefings to review the day’s itinerary 
and key information. Ask and answer questions. 
 Conduct afternoon and/or evening debriefings to 
review the next day’s itinerary, gather feedback, and 
process the day’s learning, and make any necessary 
adjustments. Engage students in conversations that 
help them process their experiences. Help them break 
down stereotypes so that when they return, they have 
a deeper understanding of the culture and country 
they visited. Draw connections to how they will take 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 22 of 80 
 
 
the experience home with them and how the lessons 
they have learned will translate back home. 
 
Check-Ins & Student Supervision: 
 Conduct frequent check-ins with the chaperone team 
to assess programming, student dynamics, and to 
make any adjustments. 
 Conduct frequent check-Ins with students about their 
behavioral and physical health as well as their ability to 
process their trip experiences. 
 Conduct nightly bed checks to be sure students are in 
their rooms at the designated time. If staying in a 
hotel/hostel be sure to request in advance for students 
to be placed near chaperones. 
 Establish a curfew with clear guidelines, and ensure 
doors are open if students congregate in the evening. 
Adults should stay close by and conduct frequent 
expected and unexpected room checks. Be mindful of 
romantic relationships amongst students. 
 Conduct regular and frequent headcounts and buddy 
checks throughout the day. Do not leave students 
alone. Students should be accompanied by chaperones 
unless part of a scheduled activity and age appropriate 
as approved by their parent/guardian in advance. 
However, if unaccompanied as part of a scheduled and 
structured activity, students should be in at least 


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 23 of 80 
 
 
groups of three AND always know how to reach an 
adult chaperone. 
 
DOCUMENTS TO TAKE 
All chaperones must carry a trip binder at all times (or have them 
very close at hand) that includes the following documents. The 
program leader carries the original forms; all other chaperones 
carry copies. 
● Permissions slips (updated based on contact 
verification done with families) 
● Medical Information Form and Medical Administration 
Form 
● Student & Family Conduct Agreement Form 
● Parental waivers (if applicable) 
● Notarized Airline Consent Form (if applicable) 
● Copies of passports, visas, resident cards, and other 
travel-related documents 
● Emergency Action Plan (EAP) 
● Insurance information 
● BPS Field Guide protocols with emergency phone 
numbers 
● Fire prevention and safety information 
● Incident Report (blank and/or completed) 
● Witness Report Form (blank and/or completed) 
● Incident Investigation Log (blank and/or completed) 


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 24 of 80 
 
 
● SOAP Note (blank and/or completed) 
● List of addresses and emergency contacts in-country 
for all travelers 
● Water Activities Forms if applicable 
● Program leaders carry originals of permission slips and 
medical forms; other chaperones carry copies. 
 
DOCUMENTS TO LEAVE FOR YOUR PRINCIPAL/HEAD OF 
SCHOOL 
● CAO-24 circular with checklists 
● Permissions slips (updated based on contact 
verification done with families) 
● Student & Family Conduct Agreement Form 
● Parental waivers (if applicable) 
● Medical Information Form and Medical Administration 
Form 
● Notarized Airline Consent Form (if applicable) 
● Copies of passports, visas, resident cards, and other 
travel-related documents 
● Emergency Action Plan (EAP) 
● Insurance information 
● Fire prevention and safety information 
● International Program Incident Report (blank for 
reference) 
● Water Activities Forms (if applicable) 


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 25 of 80 
 
 
AFTER THE FIELD TRIP (MANDATORY) 
Ensure all students safely return to their parents/families 
when you arrive back from the destination by following 
expectations set prior to the trip for student pick-up from 
arrival location. 
 Medical Follow-Up: Depending on travel location and 
prescribed travel medication, call all students and families 
after the trip to remind students to continue to take all 
prescribed travel medication. Additionally, remind students 
(inform parents/guardians) to see a doctor immediately if 
they are not feeling well after the trip and to inform the 
doctor of their recent travels. 
 Incident Reports: If applicable, file and follow up with an 
Incident Report. 
 
AFTER THE FIELD TRIP (SUGGESTED) 
 Write thank-you notes. 
 Present to school, family, and the community about the 
experience. 
 Conduct related creative and/or analytical projects to 
showcase student learning. 
 Write a news article about the trip for a local newspaper or 
website. 
 Email stories, journals, and pictures of your trip to the 
Department of Global Education. 


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 26 of 80 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Teaching and Learning 
Department: 
Department of Global Education  
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
315-601-0292 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
ATTACHMENTS: 
1. Overnight Field Trip Request Form 
2. Emergency Action Plan 
3. Parental Authorization for Overnight Field Trip 
4. Medical Information Form 
5. Medication Administration Form 
6. Notarized Parent/Guardian Airline Consent Form 
7. Overnight Programs Incident Report 
8. Overnight Programs Witness Report 
9. Overnight Programs Incident Log 
10. Fire Prevention and Safety Instructions 
11. BPS Student Traveler & Family Agreement Form 
12. BPS Chaperone Agreement Form 


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 27 of 80 
 
 
OVERNIGHT FIELD TRIP CHECKLIST 
Please sign this checklist, retain a copy for your file, and submit 
the original to the school office for filing. 
Your signature indicates that you read and understand the 
policies in this circular; that they have been/will be followed; and 
all checklists throughout the trip planning and the trip 
implementation process have been or will be completed. 
 
 
School Name:  
 
 
Program Leader:  
Date  
 
 
 
Signature of Principal/Head of School or 
Date 
Sponsoring District Department 


Page 28:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 28 of 80 
 
 
CAO- 24 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT FORM 
Please sign this checklist, retain a copy for your file, submit the 
original to the school office for filing and attach it to your 
completed request package. 
Your signature indicates that you read and understand the 
policies in this circular and that they have been/will be followed 
and all checklists throughout the trip planning and the trip 
implementation process have been or will be completed. 
 
 
School Name:  
 
 
 
 
 
Signature of program leader 
Date 
 
 
 
Signature of Principal/Head of School 
Date 
or Sponsoring District Department 


Page 29:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 29 of 80 
 
 
OVERNIGHT FIELD TRIP REQUEST FORM 
This form is submitted to the principal/head of school and is kept 
on file in the school office. In addition, notify the appropriate 
Network Superintendent and the Department of Global 
Education of your plans (four weeks in advance) by faxing or 
emailing as a PDF the following documents: 1) Overnight field 
Trip Request Form signed by the principal/head of school , 2) 
Day- by-Day trip itinerary, 3) Student roster; D.O.B, grade, 
emergency contact name, and number and 4) if applicable, your 
flight or train itinerary. Please call or email to ensure these 
documents have been received by all parties. 
 
SCHOOL INFORMATION: 
School:  
 
 
Date Submitted:  
 
 
 
TRIP OVERVIEW: 
Number of Students:  
Number of Chaperones:  
 
 
 
(Supervision: maximum ratio 10:1 with a two-chaperone 
minimum. For students with disabilities, the ratio of staff to 
students must be at least the same as the ratio mandated in 
their IEPs for their classes.) 


Page 30:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 30 of 80 
 
 
Field Trip Category: 
 
Destination:  
 
Dates of Trip:  
 
 
Overview of Trip (Educational Purpose): 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCOMMODATION/LODGING INFORMATION 
 
 
Accommodation Name:  
 
Address: 
 
Phone Number:  
 


Page 31:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 31 of 80 
 
 
PROGRAM PROVIDER INFORMATION 
(If working with a company, organization, or partner) 
 
Program Provider: 
 
Program Provider Contact Person:  
 
Program Provider Telephone Number:  
 
Program Email:  
 
 
ITINERARY 
Please attach the detailed day-by-day itinerary: 


Page 32:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 32 of 80 
 
 
PROGRAM LEADER: 
 
Program Leader/Lead Chaperone:  
 
 
Role in School:  
 
Program Leader Phone # (prior to the trip): 
 
Program Leader Phone # (during the trip):  
 
Program Leader Email:  
 
Other Chaperones/Roles in School/ Phone Numbers on Field Trip: 
Attach a separate sheet if necessary. 
 
Name 
Role 
Phone # 
Email 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 33:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 33 of 80 
 
Staff are not permitted to drive students. Privately owned 
vehicles, vehicles from non-approved vendors, or leased 
vehicles are not to be used to transport students to and from 
field trips except in the case of a bona fide emergency. Staff 
who use their own vehicles risk being legally liable. Please refer 
to TRN-03 for regulations regarding field trip transportation. 
 
STUDENT PARTICIPANTS: 
Please attach a student roster that includes: Legal and last 
name, D.O.B, grade, emergency contact name, and phone #. 
 
TRANSPORTATION INFORMATION: 
 
 
Method of Transportation:  
 
 
Transportation Company:  
 
(For bus transportation, only BPS-approved vendors may be 
used regardless of how the trip is paid for. See TRN-3 for list.) 
Contact Information (phone and address):  
 
 
 
 
Departure Location and Time:  
 
Return Location and Time:  
 
*If applicable, attach detailed train or flight information. 


Page 34:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 34 of 80 
 
 
FUNDING SOURCES: 
Total Cost: $  
 
 
Funding Source: 
 
Grant Number:  
 
BEDF Account Code/Description:  
 
 
 
 
Approved by:  
 
Principal/Head of School 
or Sponsoring District Department 
Date:  
 
Your signature indicates that all policies outlined in CAO-22 AND 
CAO-24 regarding overnight field trips will be followed. 


Page 35:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 35 of 80 
 
 
EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN (EAP) 
PROCEDURES FOR CALLING 911 ON A FIELD TRIP 
Do not leave the injured person alone or without an adult 
present. 
 
1. REMAIN CALM. This helps the operator receive your 
information. 
2. DIAL 911. Remember you may need to access an outside line 
first. 
3. My name is  
. I am a (your role) in the Boston 
Public Schools. 
4. I need paramedics now. 
5. My exact address is  
. 
6. There is a person with a (state type/location of injury) injury. 
7. The person’s name is  
and they are  
 
years old. 
8. The person is located at  
which is on the 
(North/South/East/West) side of the facility. 
9. I am calling from (telephone number). 
10.(Name) will meet the ambulance. 
11. Don’t hang up. Ask for the information to be repeated back 
to you and answer any questions the dispatcher may have. 
Hang up the phone when all information is correct and 
verified. 


Page 36:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 36 of 80 
 
 
12. Wait with the person until EMS arrives. 
13. Paramedics will take over care of the person when they 
arrive. A chaperone must accompany any injured student in 
the ambulance and remain with the student until the 
parent/guardian arrives. 
14. Call your head of school or appointee. The Department of 
Global Education can assist in contacting the necessary 
district personnel and insurance providers. File an Overnight 
Program Incident Report and Overnight Incident Log. 
Principal/Head of School:  
 
 
Phone Numbers:  
 
Principal Leader:  
 
Department of Safety Services: (617) 635-8000 
Department of Global Education: 
 
 
Additional Phone Numbers:  
 


Page 37:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 37 of 80 
 
 
PARENTAL AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC 
OVERNIGHT FIELD TRIP 
ASSUMPTION OF RISK, WAIVER, RELEASE, AND INDEMNITY 
HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT 
Program Leaders: 
Access the required Assumption of Risk, Waiver, Release, and 
Indemnity Hold Harmless Agreement template here. Please 
make a copy of this template document before you edit the text 
in RED, and then share it with the Director of Global Education. 
This document is to be reviewed by the Director of Global 
Education & BPS Legal BEFORE sharing with parents/guardians 
for signature** 
This document is a requirement, and a binding legal document. 
Should you have any questions, please contact the Department 
of Global Education. 


Page 38:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 38 of 80 
 
 
MEDICAL FORM OVERNIGHT TRIPS 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
IMPORTANT NOTES: 
• Students may be in new and unfamiliar situations when 
traveling. It is critical that this form is completed thoroughly 
and accurately so we may be in the best position possible to 
support you/your child. 
• Please indicate with an X  
HERE if you would like to 
schedule a meeting with the program leader of the trip to 
discuss your child’s medical or mental health. 
• To participate in a domestic overnight trip, a copy of the 
student’s current school year physical examination record 
must be on file at the school in order to participate on an 
overnight field trip. If traveling internationally, all students 
must visit their primary care doctor prior to traveling and be 
current on all immunizations and vaccinations for the U.S. in 
addition to the recommended immunizations and 
vaccinations for the locations/country(s) to be visited. 
• To be completed by the parent/guardian of the BPS student. 


Page 39:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 39 of 80 
 
 
STUDENT INFORMATION 
 
Student’s Full Name: 
 
 
Date of Birth: 
 
 
Country of Origin: 
Parent/Guardian Name: 
 
 
Cell: 
Home: 
Work: 
Email: 
Home Address: 
Parent/Guardian Name: 
 
 
Cell: 
Home: 
Work: 
Email: 
Home Address: 


Page 40:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 40 of 80 
 
 
Emergency Contact # 1 
 
 
Name: 
 
 
Relationship to student: 
 
 
Address: 
 
 
Cell #: 
Work #: 
Email: 
Emergency Contact # 2 
 
 
Name: 
 
 
Relationship to student: 
 
 
Address: 
 
 
Cell #: 
Work #: 
Email: 


Page 41:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 41 of 80 
 
 
MEDICAL FORM OVERNIGHT TRIPS 
STUDENT HEALTH QUESTIONS 
IMPORTANT NOTES to be completed by the parent/guardian of 
the BPS student at least two months in advance of trip: 
1. Primary care physician’s name and contact information (in 
case of an emergency): 
 
 
2. Health insurance provider’s name, policy #, and contact 
information (in case of emergency): 
 
 
3. Insurance provider claim instructions/procedures (in case of 
emergency): 
 
 
4. The student has the following health conditions and/or 
allergies of which BPS should be 
aware: 
 
 
5. Physical health conditions: 
 
 
6. Behavioral/mental health conditions: (e.g., depression, 
anxiety, etc.) 
 
 
7. Allergies (food, medication, insects, plants, animals, etc.): 


Page 42:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 42 of 80 
 
 
8. The student takes the following medications (including 
over-the-counter and herbal) and/or prescriptions of which 
BPS should be aware. (Be sure to complete the Medical 
Administration Form): 
 
 
9. If medication is taken on an as-needed basis, specify the 
symptoms or conditions when medication is to be taken 
and the time at which it may be given again. 
 
 
10. Is there any factor that makes it advisable for your child to 
follow a limited program of physical activity? (i.e., asthma, 
recent surgery, heart condition, fear, etc.) If yes, specify the 
ways in which you wish their program limited. If the student 
has asthma, please attach the asthma action plan to this 
medical form. 
 
 
11. Are there any activities on the itinerary that your child 
cannot or should not do? 
 
 
12. Other than a yearly physical, is the student currently under a 
physician’s or other medical professional’s care (e.g., social 
worker, therapist, etc.)? If yes, please detail the reason. 


Page 43:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 43 of 80 
 
 
13. Other than a yearly physical, has the student been under a 
physician’s or other medical professional’s (e.g., social 
worker, therapist, etc.) care anytime in the last year. If yes, 
please detail the reason and dates of treatment. 
 
 
14. Please list any hospital, treatment center, surgical, 
psychiatric, or urgent care visits within the last year: (Please 
specify the date, the reason, the physician or professional 
seen, and the length of stay.) 
 
 
15. Additional information of which BPS should be aware 
concerning student’s health: 


Page 44:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 44 of 80 
 
 
I authorize the release of the information given above to 
chaperones and other school staff in order to coordinate 
services and understand that chaperones will consult with 
the school nurse about each student's health so they will be 
in the strongest position to support you/your child on this 
program. 
 
 
 
Student Signature, if at least 18 years of age 
Date 
 
 
 
 
Parent/Guardian Signature, if the student 
Date 
is under 18 years of age 
 
 
▪ If necessary, attach the doctor’s letter to this form. 
▪ If necessary, attach the asthma action plan to this form. 
▪ If necessary, attach the diabetes action plan to this form. 
▪ If necessary, attach copies that document student shots 
and immunizations to this form. 


Page 45:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 45 of 80 
 
 
MEDICAL FORM: OVERNIGHT TRIPS 
MEDICATION ADMINISTRATION 
 
*Please send only essential medications with your student 
on this trip. 
 
 
Student Name:  
 
1. Name of Medication:  
 
Time(s) to be taken:  
 
Reason for Medication:  
 
Side effects to be aware of/other information:  
 
 
 
2. Name of Medication:  
 
 
Time(s) to be taken:  
 
Reason for Medication:  
 
Side effects to be aware of/other information:  
 
 
 


Page 46:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 46 of 80 
 
 
3. Name of Medication:  
 
Time(s) to be taken:  
 
Reason for Medication:  
 
Side effects to be aware of/other information:  
 
 
 
4. Name of Medication:  
 
 
Time(s) to be taken:  
 
 
Reason for Medication:  
 
Side effects to be aware of/other information:  
 
 
 
 
 
Additional information/special instructions: 


Page 47:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 47 of 80 
 
 
I authorize my child to take the above medications on this trip. 
 
 
 
 
 
Student Signature, if at least 18 years of age 
Date 
 
 
 
 
Parent/Guardian Signature, if student is 
Date 
under 18 years of age 


Page 48:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 48 of 80 
 
 
TRAVEL CONSENT FORM (PAGE 1) 
 
The parties to this agreement are: 
Parent/ Legal Guardian: (hereinafter referred to as “the 
parent/guardian”) 
 
First and Last Name: 
 
Physical Address: 
 
Contact Details: 
 
Child: (hereinafter referred to as “the child”) 
 
 
First and Last Name: 
 
Birthdate: 
 
Traveling Guardian(s) and Contact Details: (hereinafter referred 
to as “The Traveling Guardians”) 
 
 
Full Name: 
Address: 
Contact Details: 


Page 49:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 49 of 80 
 
 
Notarized Parent/Guardian Airline Travel Consent Form (page 2) 
 
1. I hereby authorize the child to travel with the traveling 
guardians to the following destination: 
2. The period of travel shall be from  
 to 
 
. 
3. Should it prove to be impossible to notify the parent/ 
guardian of any change in travel plans due to an emergency 
or unforeseen circumstances arising, I authorize the 
traveling guardian to authorize such travel plans. 
4. Should the traveling guardian in their sole discretion (which 
discretion shall not be unreasonably exercised) deem it 
advisable to make special travel arrangements for the child 
to be returned home due to unforeseen circumstances 
arising, I accept full responsibility for the additional costs 
which shall be incurred thereby. 
5. I indemnify the traveling guardian against any and all claims 
whatsoever and howsoever arising, save where such claims 
arise from negligence, gross negligence, or willful intent 
during the specified period of this travel consent. 
6. I declare that I am the legal custodian of the child and that I 
have the legal authority to grant travel consent to the 
traveling guardian of the child. 
7. Unless inconsistent with the context, words signifying the 
singular shall include the plural and vice versa. 


Page 50:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 50 of 80 
 
 
Notarized Parent/Guardian Airline Travel Consent Form (page 3) 
 
 
Signed at  
on the  
day of 
 
, 20 
. 
 
Signature  
(Parent/ Guardian) 
Signature  
 
(Witness 1) 
Signature  
(Witness 2) 
*Witness signatures must be by independent persons and not by 
anyone listed on the Travel Consent form. 
 
On this  
day of  
, 20  
, before me, 
the undersigned authority, personally appeared and proved to 
me through satisfactory evidence of identity, to wit, to be the 
person(s) whose name(s) is/are signed on the attached 
document and who signed in my presence. 
 
 
Official Notary Signature:  
 
 
 
Name of Notary Typed, Printed or Stamped: 
 
 
Commission Expires:  
 


Page 51:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 51 of 80 
 
 
STUDENT SUPPORT DURING DOMESTIC OVERNIGHT 
PROGRAMS FORM (RECOMMENDED) 
 
 
Note: This form is to be completed by students who intend to 
participate in an overnight program. The information is 
confidential and will be used by program leaders to better 
understand and support the needs of students while on program 
in a foreign country. 
Student First & Last Name:  
 
 
 
When preparing for your international program, please think 
about the following questions, and respond as honestly as 
possible in order to be supported: 
1. What are you nervous about? 
 
 
 
 
2. What are you excited about? 
 
 
 
 
3. What scares you about the trip location or activities 
(itinerary)? 


Page 52:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 52 of 80 
 
 
4. When in a new environment, I get anxious when… 
 
 
 
 
5. When in a new environment, I get upset when… 
 
 
 
 
6. In order to get the most learning and benefits from 
this experience, I will need… 


Page 53:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 53 of 80 
 
 
DOMESTIC OVERNIGHT PROGRAMS INCIDENT REPORT 
Incident reports should be used for all yellow and red incidents 
that are not fully described or investigated already through the 
SOAP Note. 
 
A. Complete all Fields: 
School/s:  
 
Date of Report:  
 
Country: 
 
Incident Date and Time:  
 
Reporting Chaperone:  
 
B. Complete all Applicable Fields: 
 
Victim(s) Name(s) 
Contact Information 
 
Suspect(s) Name(s) 
Contact Information 
 
Witness(s) Name(s) 
Contact Information 
 
Location of Event 
Address 
 


Page 54:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 54 of 80 
 
 
Domestic Overnight Programs Incident Report (page 2) 
 
C. Nature of Incident (check all that apply) 
 
 Injury 
 Equipment Fail 
 Behavioral/ 
Psychological 
 Illness 
 Missing/Separa- 
ted Person 
 Natural Disaster 
 Physical Assault 
 Sexual 
Assault 
 Theft 
 Property 
Damage 
 Sexual 
Harassment 
 Fatality 
 Crime 
 Political 
Upheaval 
 Disease 
Outbreak 
 BPS Code 
of Conduct 
violation 
 Other: 
 
 
D. Narrative (Using facts, describe what happened): 


Page 55:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 55 of 80 
 
 
Domestic Overnight Programs Incident Report (page 3) 
 
E. Activity at Time of Incident (check all that apply) 
 
 Class time 
 Service 
 Homestay 
 Traveling 
 Fieldtrip 
 Camping 
 Hike/Jog/Walk 
 Swimming 
 Water Activity 
 Other: 
 
 
F. Contributing Factors (Check all that apply) 
 
 Not disclosed in 
medical form 
 Sports/Recreation 
 Animal/Insect/Plant 
 Pre-Existing 
Condition 
 Alcohol/Drugs/ 
Medication 
 Motor Vehicle 
 Weather/Terrain 
 Pre-Course Info 
 Orientation/ 
Training 
 Political/ 
Cultural/ 
Language 
 Other 
 


Page 56:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 56 of 80 
 
 
Domestic Overnight Programs Incident Report (page 3) 
 
G. Action Taken 
Details 
First Aid 
When 
By Whom 
 
Type (i.e., medication, CPR, 
etc.) 
 
Emergency Evacuation 
 
Visit Medical Facility 
Name of Facility 
Doctor/PA/Nurse 
Reported Diagnosis 
Medication Prescribed 
 
Emergency Contact Person 
Notified? 
☐ Yes 
☐No 
Name: 
Date and Time Contacted: 
Notes: 


Page 57:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 57 of 80 
 
 
G. Action Taken 
Details 
Department of Global 
Education (DGE) Contacted? 
☐ Yes 
☐No 
Name: 
Date and Time DGE Contacted: 
Notes: 
Insurance Contacted? 
☐ Yes 
☐No 
Name: 
Date and Time Contacted: 
Claim #: 
Notes: 
Local Authorities Notified? 
☐ Yes 
☐No 
Date and Time Notified: 
Organization: 
Authority Name(s): 
Notes: 


Page 58:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 58 of 80 
 
 
G. Action Taken 
Details 
Follow-up Plan 
Details: 
 
 
 
Signature of Reporting Chaperone: 
Date: 
File this Overnight Incident Programs Report along with 
any accompanying reports/documents from local law 
enforcement, medical professionals, and/or International 
Programs Witness Report via email if possible OR as soon 
as circumstances permit. Turn in the original report to the 
DGE as soon as you return to Boston. Incident reports 
require at least one witness signature, and where possible 
the signatures of all impacted participants. 


Page 59:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 59 of 80 
 
 
Domestic Overnight Programs Incident Report (page 6) 
 
 
Witness Signature 
Date 
Signatures of those impacted: 
1. 
Date:  
 
2. 
Date:  
 
 
3. 
Date:  
 
4. 
Date:  
 


Page 60:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 60 of 80 
 
 
DOMESTIC OVERNIGHT PROGRAMS WITNESS REPORT 
Witnesses shall use this form to provide a statement of their 
observations to accompany the Incident Report Form. 
 
Witness Statement of [Name]:  
 
Phone Number:  
 
Address: 
 
 
 
 
Description of Incident: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I believe the contents of this statement are true. 
Signature:  
 Date:  
 


Page 61:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 61 of 80 
 
 
DOMESTIC OVERNIGHT PROGRAMS 
INVESTIGATION LOG 
This template can be used to take running notes during an 
investigation. 
 
Event 
Time 
Location 
Parties 
Involved 
Source of 
Information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 62:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 62 of 80 
 
 
Event 
Time 
Location 
Parties 
Involved 
Source of 
Information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature of Investigator 
Date 


Page 63:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 63 of 80 
 
 
SOAP NOTE 
SOAP Notes should be used for live documentation of all health 
related incidents requiring further monitoring and/or 
evacuation. SOAP Notes should be attached to the 
corresponding Incident Report. 
 
Subjective: What the patient tells you; note the chief 
complaint(s): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objective: What you see; vital signs; general survey of patient: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assessment: What you think is going on; diagnosis presented by 
medical professional: 
 
 
 
 
Anticipated Problems: 


Page 64:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 64 of 80 
 
 
Plan: What will be done about it; Tests ordered, medications 
prescribed, follow up needed: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reporting Chaperone 
Date 
File this SOAP Note along with any accompanying 
reports/documents from local law enforcement, medical 
professionals and/or International Programs Witness Report via 
email if possible OR as soon as circumstances permit. Turn in the 
original report to the DGE as soon as you return to Boston. 


Page 65:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 65 of 80 
 
 
FIRE PREVENTION AND SAFETY PRACTICES 
OVERNIGHT PROGRAMS 
Fire safety plans on overnight and international programs 
differ from the procedures set for our schools. The laws that 
regulate fire prevention may differ from what exists in 
Massachusetts. The steps below must be followed on all 
overnight and international programs: 
1. Conduct a fire prevention assessment. 
The program leader must conduct a fire safety 
prevention assessment using the Fire Prevention and 
Safety Form (Attachment A) within 24 hours of arrival. 
Using the Fire Prevention and Safety Form, the 
program leader shall formulate a plan for the 
evacuation of all persons on the trip in the event of a 
fire or other emergency. This plan shall include 
alternate means of egress and should be created in 
consultation with an accommodation staff person, and 
if applicable, the third-party provider. 
2. Prepare Chaperone Team on fire prevention strategy. 
Based on the results from the Fire Prevention and 
Safety Form, the program leader should ensure that 
each staff member receives and understands the fire 
prevention landscape and has instructions on the fire 
drill procedure created for the accommodation. 
Questions to review include: 
a. What are the best means of egress in case of a fire? 
(Consider all rooms students and staff are staying in 


Page 66:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 66 of 80 
 
 
and all places where the group may congregate. Use 
the hotel’s posted evacuation routes if applicable.) 
b. Where is the designated meeting point? (This 
meeting point should be a safe distance from the 
building, but easy for the group to identify and 
locate.) 
c. Who is responsible for each student? (Attendance 
must be taken; if chaperone ratios permit, the lead 
chaperone should not be assigned to a group and 
should serve as the contact person for emergency 
personnel.) 
d. What are some hazards that students and 
chaperones should be aware of? 
e. What happens in the case of a missing person? 
3. Review prevention strategy with students and conduct a 
fire drill. 
The lead chaperone and the chaperone team will 
review the fire prevention strategy and conduct a fire 
drill (walkthrough) with the students within the first 24 
hours of the trip. Conducting a fire drill (walkthrough) 
is important as participants are unfamiliar with the 
building. 
Instructions for fire drills: 
Since each accommodation is different, each plan and 
drill will vary. Regardless of the accommodation, it is 
critical that a procedure is in place for evacuating the 
building, each chaperone knows their responsibilities, 
every student participates in the fire drill 


Page 67:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 67 of 80 
 
 
(walkthrough), and each person knows the meeting 
location when evacuated from the building. Please 
note: A fire drill as defined here is a walkthrough of the 
route the group will take to exit the premises in the 
event of an emergency. 
A few general instructions: 
● Evacuate immediately. 
● Do not use elevators during a fire evacuation. 
● Each student should walk to the designated meeting 
location outside of the building in a quiet and orderly 
manner. 
● Make sure all students know all possible exits from 
their area and that students know where the meeting 
location is outside of the building. 
● Fire drill plans must ensure adequate procedures for 
the emergency evacuation of students and staff with 
disabilities. (Have a staging location for students/staff 
with disabilities and make sure hotel/hostel personnel 
are also aware.) 
● Chaperones are responsible for students under their 
supervision and must take attendance. 


Page 68:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 68 of 80 
 
 
● Upon the evacuation of a building, no person or 
persons shall re-enter the building without the 
authorization of the lead chaperone. The lead 
chaperone, as a part of their fire drill procedures, must 
establish a command procedure for such evacuations. 
4. Conduct a post-fire drill debrief. 
After the fire drill, the chaperone team should set aside 
time to debrief. Record response on Attachment A. 


Page 69:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 69 of 80 
 
 
FIRE PREVENTION AND SAFETY ASSESSMENT FORM 
For each accommodation, please complete and, upon your 
return, file this form with other documents you are 
mandated to keep. Legally, these documents must be kept 
on file for the current fiscal year plus three additional years 
after the field trip has occurred. 
 
BUILDING: 
Program Leader:  
 
 
Date of the Safety Prevention Assessment:  
 
Name/s and Titles of Staff Consulted for Assessment:  
 
 
 
(accommodation staff/ program provider staff) 
 
 
OUTSIDE THE BUILDING: 
List the possible hazards in the area: 
 
 
 
 
Can the accommodation be accessed by a fire department 
or emergency team?  YES 
 NO 


Page 70:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 70 of 80 
 
 
INSIDE THE BUILDING 
 
Equipment: 
Does the building have fire alarms? 
☐ YES 
☐ NO 
Are there fire sprinklers? 
☐ YES 
☐ NO 
If yes, where are they located? 
 
 
 
Is there adequate lighting in the corridors? 
 
☐ YES 
 
☐ NO 
Are there clear exit signs? 
☐ YES 
☐ NO 
Are there fire alarm pull stations? 
☐ YES 
☐ NO 
Are the fire alarm pull stations visible and 
accessible? 
 
☐ YES 
 
☐ NO 
Are there fire extinguishers? 
☐ YES 
☐ NO 
If yes, where? 
 
 
 
Are there smoke detectors in the corridors and in 
 
 
every room where participants are staying? 
☐YES 
☐NO 
 
 
Hazards: 
List the potential fire hazards at the site: 
 
 
 
 
Are there notable fire hazards such as open fire doors, 
accumulated trash, blocked corridors, locked exit doors, blocked 


Page 71:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 71 of 80 
 
 
stairways, burned-out exit lights, or missing/broken fire 
equipment? 
☐ YES 
☐ NO 
Means of Evacuation/Egress: 
 
 
Does the facility have an evacuation plan for 
each room? (If not, be sure that when you 
conduct a fire drill (walkthrough) that you 
develop a plan for leaving the room.) 
 
 
 
☐ YES 
 
 
 
☐ NO 
What are the means of egress? 
 
 
 
Are there primary exits and alternate exits? 
 
☐ YES 
 
☐ NO 
Note locations: 
 
 
 
FIRE DRILL/WALKTHROUGH PLAN: 
 
 
(Please record notes below.) 
 
 


Page 72:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 72 of 80 
 
 
POST-DRILL DEBRIEF: 
Date and time of the fire drill:  
 
 
 
Did the students and chaperones follow the procedures of the 
fire drill? If no, why not? 
☐YES 
☐NO 
 
 
 
 
Based on this debrief, either inform the students of your 
findings for adjustments or, if necessary, conduct another 
fire drill. Once the safety review and drill are completed, 
please sign below. 
 
Signature of Program Leader:  
 


Page 73:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 73 of 80 
 
 
BPS STUDENT TRAVELER & FAMILY AGREEMENT 
FOR DOMESTIC OVERNIGHT TRAVEL 
Overview: Positive behavior is a key expectation for students 
participating in domestic and international travel opportunities. 
Positive behavior reflects trustworthiness, respect, responsibility, 
ambassadorship, and service. Participants are expected to fully 
participate, follow all program guidelines, and behave 
appropriately to ensure a high-quality learning experience. 
Parent/guardians: please read this contract carefully with your 
student and sign it. 
Students: your signature on this contract seals your commitment 
to follow behavior expectations leading up to, and during your 
school trip. 
 
STUDENTS: 
Before I go on the trip: 
● I understand that my acceptance to a trip prior to departure 
does not guarantee that I will be allowed to attend. 
● I have access to my school's handbook which includes all 
BPS and school rules and the BPS Code of Conduct. 
● I know that it is my responsibility to follow all BPS rules and 
guidelines set by the administrator or chaperone. 
● I will attend all mandatory pre-departure meetings and 
complete all mandatory paperwork. 
● I will not violate the BPS Code of Conduct. 


Page 74:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 74 of 80 
 
 
● I will not distribute or consume alcohol or drugs (including 
edibles) and/or encourage actions that are against the BPS 
Code of Conduct or law. 
● I will not pack any illegal or inappropriate items (i.e., items in 
violation of the BPS Code of Conduct, including, but not 
limited to: weapons, alcohol, edibles, drug paraphernalia). 
● I will be compliant with any guidelines set by the school, 
administrator, or chaperone regarding program 
expectations and any required materials, such as completed 
projects, journals, and service hours. 
● I know that if I do not act appropriately, or if I violate any 
rule, there are consequences for my actions. Such 
consequences include, but are not limited to, not being 
allowed to participate in the international trip program. 
While I am on the trip: 
● I will not violate the BPS Code of Conduct. 
● I will ask for help from the adults when needed. 
● I will treat my peers, all adults, and all people with the 
utmost level of respect. 
● I will not purchase, distribute, or consume any illegal or 
inappropriate items (i.e., items in violation of BPS Code of 
Conduct, including but not limited to: weapons, alcohol, 
edibles, drug paraphernalia), even if these substances are 
legal in the state or foreign country, or I am of legal age in 
the foreign country. 


Page 75:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 75 of 80 
 
 
● I will use social media responsibly during the trip and will 
not post or communicate any information regarding other 
students during an emergency. 
● I will abide by the established curfew and sleep alone in my 
assigned bed and sleeping location each night. 
● I will not vandalize any property at any venue I visit (hotel, 
tour bus, tourist sites, homestay location). 
● I will obey the BPS dress code, as well as the suggested 
attire for the foreign country and specific sites and locations 
within the foreign country I will visit. 
● I will not share any medication with anyone on the trip. 
● I will take medication prescribed for me by my doctor for 
required or recommended medical use while abroad (e.g., 
malaria pills, asthma inhaler, prescriptions for anxiety, 
depression). 
● I will not leave the group at any time unless specifically 
authorized to do so. 
● I will practice good common sense, respect, and 
consideration for others and their property. 
● I understand that I am responsible for keeping my passport, 
important belongings, and other travel documents safe. 
● I understand that partaking in any illegal activity abroad can 
result in my arrest. 
● I understand that if an issue of any kind arises, my 
chaperone will address the issue, and their decision is final. 


Page 76:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 76 of 80 
 
 
● I know that if I do not act appropriately, or if I violate any 
rule, that there are consequences for my actions. Such 
consequences include, but are not limited to, being sent 
home at my parent/guardian's expense. 
 
PARENT/GUARDIANS/ STUDENTS AGE 18 OR OLDER: 
I fully understand the following conditions regarding student 
international travel with BPS: 
1. The BPS Code of Conduct applies to all field trips. Following 
an investigation, if the program leader, in consultation with 
the principal/head of school and Central Office staff, 
determines that a student’s conduct while on an overnight 
trip poses a risk to themselves, or the safety of the group, or 
is no longer manageable by BPS staff in the field, the district 
reserves the right to request and arrange for that student to 
return home. The district also reserves the right to request 
that families assume responsibility for all or a portion of the 
costs associated with their child’s return. Students may be 
subject to further disciplinary action and will be provided 
the opportunity to have a formal hearing at the school level 
upon return. 
2. If a student is to be dismissed from an overnight field trip 
due to behavior that violates the BPS Code of Conduct while 
participating in a domestic overnight trip, the student’s 
parent/guardian must be notified in advance and should 
agree to meet the student at the airport or other agreed- 
upon destination. If the parent/guardian is not reachable, 
the student’s principal or appropriate school-based point of 
contact must be notified and agree to meet the student at 
the airport or other agreed-upon destination. Students 
under the age of 16 must be accompanied on their flight by 


Page 77:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 77 of 80 
 
 
a chaperone. Students over the age of 16 may fly 
unaccompanied, though a chaperone must accompany the 
student to the airport to ensure the student checks in for 
their flight. (Age requirements may be subject to specific 
airline/train/bus guidelines). Any costs assumed in this 
regard will be the responsibility of the parent/guardian. 
3. Parents or students who sign contracts and/or agreements 
with third-party company vendors acknowledge that 
outside companies’ protocols and procedures might differ 
from BPS policies and procedures. Families should 
especially be aware of cancellation and refund policies. BPS 
is not responsible for money paid to third-party vendors. 
4. BPS reserves the right to cancel a trip at any time. Trip 
destinations that impose an immediate risk to our students 
will be canceled. In these instances, all families will be 
notified immediately. 
 
 
(Families: Keep this page.) 


Page 78:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 78 of 80 
 
 
(Program leaders: Keep this page.) 
 
 
STUDENT/GUARDIAN STATEMENT OF UNDERSTANDING 
We have read and understand the BPS Student Traveler & 
Family Agreement Form. We understand what is expected of the 
prospective student traveler and feel that we, the 
parent/guardian and student, can commit to these expectations. 
PARENT/GUARDIAN (print name):  
 
 
PARENT/GUARDIAN (signature)  
 
DATE  
 
PHONE NUMBER:  
 
STUDENT (print name):  
 
 
STUDENT (signature):  
 
DATE:  
 
PHONE NUMBER:  
 
 
 
(Students: Return this page to your program leader.) 


Page 79:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 79 of 80 
 
 
BPS CHAPERONE AGREEMENT FORM 
This form is to be completed by all chaperones of BPS sponsored 
field trips and submitted to the program leader (lead 
chaperone). 
 
School Name:  
 
 
Destination:  
 
 
Departure Date:  
Return Date:  
 
 
 
All chaperones must agree to abide by the following code of 
conduct in order to participate in a BPS-sponsored field trip. 
 
SAFETY & RESPONSIBILITY 
I understand that my safety and the safety of other 
participants are extremely important during this field trip, 
and I agree to make safety my first priority. I agree to 
conduct myself in a manner that promotes my safety and 
the safety of others at all times. I understand that 
maintaining students’ safety requires that students must be 
supervised by me and/or other chaperones at all times 
while students are engaged in field trip activities. For 
overnight and international field trips, I understand that 
nighttime curfews and room checks for students, as well as 
morning wake-up calls for students, are part of my 
responsibility. I agree to follow BPS policies, protocols, and 
guidance of BPS staff when in the field. 


Page 80:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 80 of 80 
 
 
DRUG & ALCOHOL POLICY 
I understand that the BPS Code of Conduct prohibits 
students from possessing, using, selling, and/or distributing 
any of the following on all domestic and international field 
trips: 
Alcohol; marijuana, non-prescribed controlled substances, 
imitation controlled substances, inhalants, other intoxicants, 
controlled or drug paraphernalia; unauthorized possession, 
use, or distribution of over-the-counter medication, and 
selling of prescription drugs. The Code also prohibits the use 
of tobacco products (including e-cigarettes, hookah 
paraphernalia, and vapor cigarettes). I understand that 
these prohibitions apply to all students, regardless of age. 
I understand that I am forbidden to use or visibly be in 
possession of tobacco in the presence of students. I also 
understand that the use of all other drugs, including 
alcohol, and weapons are strictly prohibited on the field trip. 
 
 
Chaperone Name (Printed):  
 
 
Chaperone Name (Signature):  
 
 
Date:  
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-01 
Version 01 
 
PROMOTION POLICY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
Boston Public Schools students are the leaders, scholars, 
entrepreneurs, advocates, and innovators of tomorrow. BPS will 
ensure that 100% of those students are ready for college, career, 
and life. We will ensure that every graduate: 
● is a proficient reader, communicator, problem-solver, and 
critical thinker; 
● demonstrates the habits of mind and work required for 
success in school and the world of work; 
● knows how to acquire knowledge, connect it to familiar 
concepts and prior knowledge, and apply it, using 
sophisticated technologies; 
● has mastered key skills and understands important 
concepts from English Language Arts, Mathematics, Science 
and Technology, History and Social Science, at least one 
World Language, the Arts, Health, and Physical Education; 
● has applied these concepts in real-life contexts; and 
● has made a valued contribution to the school and 
community. 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
 
These expectations frame the teaching, learning, and assessment 
process. They are critical to lifelong learning and essential to 
gaining students’ commitment to the learning process.   
 
RESPONSIBILITIES AND ACCOUNTABILITY 
Every teacher, administrator, parent, and adult involved in the 
lives of our students share in the responsibility to ensure that all 
students meet these expectations.   
The Boston Public Schools:  
Schools, and the adults who work in them, are accountable for 
ensuring every student learns in an environment that is safe, 
welcoming, and sustaining; receives quality instruction that is 
responsive to their strengths and needs; and receives timely 
information about their progress. 
Families and Students: 
Families are responsible for ensuring their children come to 
school each day, on time, ready to learn.  Every student is also 
responsible for coming to school and class prepared and on time, 
working hard, and contributing to the school environment in a 
positive, responsible manner. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
 
THE BPS PROMOTION POLICY 
This promotion policy has been developed in alignment with the 
BPS Opportunity and Achievement Gap Policy which states in its 
preamble: “Every child, in every classroom, in every school of the 
Boston Public School system has the same opportunity to 
achieve the greatness within them as anybody else. Every child 
has the same unfettered access to every conceivable tool to 
unlock the greatness within them.” The BPS Promotion Policy 
outlines the expectations for school teams that ensure that 
students have access to every conceivable tool that will support 
them to meet grade-level learning expectations before 
considering the possibility of retention.  
BPS school teams and individual educators must provide all 
students with access to high-quality, differentiated, and relevant 
tier 1 instruction that is aligned with grade-level standards and 
implemented through high-quality materials. School teams and 
individual educators must monitor student progress towards 
grade-level expectations through formal and informal data 
collection and make ongoing adjustments to instruction to 
respond to evidence of student learning. School teams and 
individual educators must ensure that all students have access to 
tiered supports that provide appropriate scaffolds and instruction 
so that students are able to develop grade-level knowledge and 
skills.  
In cases where it is determined that a student may not, with all 
available supports provided, develop the necessary grade-level 
knowledge and skills by the end of the school year, a school 
team, including the student, family, teachers, and the school 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
 
leader, will collectively make decisions regarding student 
promotion. If the team is unable to come to a decision or any 
member would like to dispute a decision, the Chief of Teaching 
and Learning may be brought in to support the decision-making 
process. Principals and heads of school have the final authority 
for all promotion decisions. School teams must make decisions 
based on the following principles: 
● ensure promotions are earned and based on academic 
achievement 
● diminish grade retentions to the greatest extent possible 
● ensure students will enter classrooms with the skill and 
knowledge necessary to do grade-level work or have the 
necessary supports to accelerate learning 
● ensure students are prepared to demonstrate proficiency on 
the Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessments 
● establish a process that supports students and demands 
hard work from them 
● recognize that students learn at different rates and call for 
organizational structures that respond to students’ 
differences 
● define those inputs and outcomes for which teachers, 
administrators, parents, and students are accountable. 
 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
 
PROMOTION REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL GRADES 
Students must fulfill several requirements to be promoted to the 
next grade. All students must earn passing grades in core 
academic courses and maintain good attendance. Schools may 
establish promotion requirements that exceed those listed. The 
School Site Council must approve these additional requirements. 
High school students must pass courses that align to the BPS 
Graduation Policy (CAO-07) in order to earn the credits necessary 
to graduate. 
 
ENGLISH LEARNERS 
Students in programs for English learners must meet promotion 
and graduation requirements. However, EL students may not be 
retained in grade if the only reason for not passing the required 
tests is a lack of language knowledge.  
 
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES 
Students with disabilities are expected to meet promotion and 
graduation requirements. A student’s Individualized Education 
Program (IEP) or Section 504 plan will describe the conditions 
under which the student will take standardized tests for each 
subject scheduled for assessment or if the student requires an 
alternate assessment. Alternate assessments are intended for a 
minimal number of students with significant disabilities who are 
unable to take standard MCAS tests, even with accommodations. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
 
A student’s 504 plan will describe what, if any, testing 
accommodation will be needed. 
 
REQUIRED PROCESS 
Principals and heads of school are responsible for effectively 
implementing the following process: 
1. Parents must be notified by the end of September of the name 
and phone number of the school staff member (in addition to 
their child’s teachers) they should call about concerns related 
to their child’s academic progress. Parents should also be 
informed that if they ever have a concern about their child’s 
academic progress, they should notify the appropriate teacher 
and principal/head of school (or the designated administrative 
liaison to parents). 
 
2. If by mid-October, a teacher considers a student at-risk of not 
meeting the subject or grade-level standards, the teacher will 
notify the parent immediately, in writing, and refer the student 
to the appropriate administrator, guidance counselor, or 
student support services personnel.   
 
3. When a student has been identified as at-risk of not meeting 
subject or grade-level standards, the principal/head of school, 
teacher(s), and other designated staff will work with parents 
and the student to resolve any problems. They may consider a 
variety of options, including:    


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
 
● tiered academic or social emotional supports 
● examining and altering current instructional strategies or 
materials 
● tutoring (during or after school) 
● a change in schedule 
● a change in teacher 
● referral to other support, social service, or health-related 
services 
● problem-solving with other students or individuals who may 
have an impact on the students’ achievement. 
 
4. If by the close of the first marking term, the problem persists 
and the student remains at-risk for retention, additional 
options will be considered, including: 
● referral to the school’s Student Success Team (SST) 
● referral to safety net or alternative programs for more 
intensive services 
● access to additional instructional time (during the day, 
extended day, or summer school) 
● referral to special education, where necessary and 
appropriate, to determine evidence of a disability (pre-
referral documentation must provide evidence that other 
interventions have been attempted). 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
 
Parents will be engaged in consideration of additional 
intervention strategies and will be informed, in writing, of any 
decisions that result. Parents may request a referral for special 
education services in any case. The final determination of 
appropriate services will rest with the appropriate (IEP or 
Section 504) team. 
 
5. Only when all other interventions have been unsuccessful and 
the student has not made sufficient academic progress during 
the course of a school year will the student be considered for 
retention. All potential retentions will be reviewed by a 
Promotion Review Team, including the principal/head of 
school (or designee), a guidance counselor or student support 
team member, at least one of the student’s teachers, and the 
child’s parent.   
 
6. The review team will include the liaison teacher for any 
student with an IEP, and a bilingual teacher, counselor, or 
administrator for any student enrolled in a transitional 
bilingual program.  
 
7. By the end of January, formal, written notices must be sent to 
parents of students who remain at risk of being retained. The 
Promotion Review Team will meet in February and again 
before the end of the year to review and make decisions on 
students who are at risk of being retained. Principals and 
heads of school have the final authority for all promotion 
decisions.   
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
 
8. During the period from February through June, schools must 
maintain written, bimonthly contact with parents who were 
sent formal, written notices to apprise them of their child’s 
progress.  Copies of these notifications must be kept on file. 
 
9. Any student who is retained, or remains at-risk even though 
they were promoted, will be provided with additional support, 
including tutoring during the subsequent school year. 
 
HOME-SCHOOL PARTNERSHIPS 
The success of many students receiving transition support 
depends on the engagement of their parent(s) in their education. 
Schools implement a variety of strategies to help parents 
become successful partners in their children's development. 
These efforts are coordinated by the school’s guidance and other 
support staff. 
 
CONNECTIONS TO COMMUNITY RESOURCES 
Schools will collaborate with community agencies, community 
schools, and higher education institutions to support students' 
overall literacy and math development, increase volunteer 
involvement in schools, and diminish the many health, social, and 
emotional problems that undermine success in school. These 
efforts are supported by the school’s guidance and other support 
staff. 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Teaching and Learning 
Department: 
Office of Teaching & Learning 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9000 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-22 
Version 01 
  
 
GENERAL GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES FOR 
ALL FIELD TRIPS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
IMPORTANT NOTE: These guidelines might be impacted by 
COVID-19 restrictions and are subject to change based on public 
health, international security, or other emergent issues that could 
impact travel. For the most up-to-date information and guidance, 
contact the Department of Global Education 
(OPL@bostonpublicschools.org) for assistance and guidance.  
 
This Superintendent’s Circular provides instructions for 
implementing the field trip policy passed by the Boston School 
Committee on November 20, 2019. 
Program leaders (chaperones) must read this circular in its 
entirety. Principals/heads of school (and/or the district 
department sponsoring the trip) are responsible for ensuring that 
all field trip policies and procedures outlined in this circular and 
all the field trip circulars are adhered to.  
BPS SPONSORED FIELD TRIP: DEFINITION 
A BPS sponsored trip is any trip involving BPS students and 
employees that: uses BPS funds in any way; takes place during 
regular school operating hours; is organized by BPS employee(s) 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 2 of 22 
 
during normal employment hours, either while on BPS property 
or while using BPS-issued technology; and/or is related directly to 
the instructional program at the school. Cases where students 
elect to participate in a third-party travel program with the 
consent of their family, whereby they will travel alone, and not 
with a school group, are not considered BPS sponsored field trips, 
even if students receive funding support from their school or 
district.  
TYPES OF FIELD TRIPS 
BPS has divided field trips into three types:  
● Day field trip  
● Overnight field trip 
● International field trip 
This division ensures that permission forms and procedures are 
directly relevant to the type of trip and activities students will 
engage in.  
Refer to the circular appropriate for your type of trip for further 
details:  
● Day field trips — Superintendent Circular CAO-23 
● Overnight field trips — Superintendent Circular CAO-24 
● International field trips — Superintendent Circular CAO-25 
● Water activities — Superintendent Circular CAO-27 
PURPOSE OF FIELD TRIPS  
All BPS sponsored field trips must serve the purpose of providing 
either instruction or enrichment. Instructional trips support the 
instructional program and should be directly linked to the 
curriculum and standards of that grade level or subject area. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 3 of 22 
 
Enrichment trips contribute to students’ academic, cultural, or 
social development, and aim to deepen their engagement with 
school and learning. Sites for field trips should be carefully 
selected to enrich student learning and exposure to the 
community, new people, places, and activities. Discuss with 
students and families the trip’s purpose, learning goals, and 
behavior expectations in advance, and engage students in 
activities before, during, and after the trip. It is important to note 
the serious obligations that BPS staff members undertake to 
ensure that all field trips are not only educationally sound, but 
also manage risk. 
FIELD TRIP CATEGORIES  
A trip often meets more than one category. 
● Instructional field trip: Enhances a specific curriculum unit 
or serves a broader educational purpose.  
● Cultural field trip: Engages students in cultural awareness or 
understanding experiences to learn more about their own 
cultural identity, or that of others.  
● Community building field trip: May reinforce relationships 
in an existing group of students, prepare students for a 
significant transition into a new structure or community, 
help students work collaboratively, or assist in the 
development of leadership and decision-making skills. 
● Service learning field trip: Students learn the value of 
helping others in their own community and beyond, while 
simultaneously learning from the host community. These 
trips show students how empowering service to others is 
while developing students’ leadership skills. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 4 of 22 
 
● Personal growth and development: Students are exposed 
to new group or individual activities whereby they learn new 
skills and new ideas, develop identity, build self-esteem, 
grow strengths, and build camaraderie.  
FIELD TRIP TYPES AND TIMELINES FOR APPROVAL 
It is necessary that the proper procedures are followed, and that 
copies of all checklists, permission and medical forms are kept on 
file in the school office and, when appropriate, filed with the 
district. If the deadlines and details below are not met, a field trip 
application may be rejected. Please note that trip planning 
timelines (i.e., “twelve weeks (or more) prior to the field trip”, etc.) 
in each circular chronicle the minimal amount of time for 
planning. More time for pre-trip planning is strongly 
recommended for all types of field trips. 
● Day Field Trip (CAO-23): Any domestic trip off school grounds 
that is no more than one day in duration.  
o Day Field Trip forms are submitted to the 
principal/head of school at least 4 weeks in advance 
(or at the principal/head of school’s discretion) and 
approved by the principals/heads of school.  
o Walking field trips are day field trips that require 
walking within a one-mile radius of the school (i.e., 
local garden, park, field, etc.). The Parent/Guardian 
Authorization and Acknowledgement of Risks for 
Walking Trips form will apply for all walking field trips 
during the current school year and will need to be 
updated each school year, or as student/family 
information changes. The school is still required to 
inform families in advance of each walking field trip 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 5 of 22 
 
and obtain principal/head of school approval.  
o All forms, including the signed CAO-23 checklist 
form, are filed at the school. 
o The principal/head of school or designee is the 
emergency contact for day field trips. 
● Overnight Field Trip (CAO-24): Any domestic trip off school 
grounds that involves students’ participation overnight. 
Travel to U.S. territories, including Puerto Rico, the United 
States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and Northern 
Mariana Islands are considered domestic, but are covered 
under international travel insurance. Travel to these 
territories is subject to some forms, requirements, and 
protocols in the CAO-25 International Field Trip guidelines. 
Consult with the Department of Global Education for 
required forms for these destinations. 
o Overnight Field Trip forms are submitted to the 
principal/head of school at least 12 weeks in advance 
and approved by the principals/head of school. 
o All forms, including the signed CAO-24 checklist 
form, are filed at the school.  
o Overnight Field Trip Request forms, the list of 
student names, emergency contact name and 
number, grade, D.O.B, the list of chaperone names 
and their role in the school community, the itinerary, 
and if applicable, train and flight information are sent 
to the district to notify the district of trip plans at 
least 6 weeks in advance. Scan and email the 
Overnight Field Trip Request form and information to 
the appropriate operational leader as well as to the 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 6 of 22 
 
Department of Global Education and follow up with 
both to confirm receipt. 
o The principal/head of school or designee is the 
emergency contact for overnight field trips. 
● International Field Trip (CAO-25): Any trip off school grounds 
that involves travel to a location outside of the United States.  
o International field trips should be planned at least a 
year in advance, to maximize affordability and 
fundraising efforts, and when possible, scheduled 
during non-school time (i.e., school vacations and 
summer).  
o As soon as a trip opportunity becomes known, or 
there is interest in an international travel program, 
teachers must inform their principal/head of school 
and contact the Department of Global Education for 
support and guidance with the CAO-25 application, 
and planning process. No arrangements, payments, 
or deposits should be made without consultation 
with the Department of Global Education and 
formal application approval from the 
superintendent.  
o After consulting with the Department of Global 
Education and head of school, CAO-25 applications 
shall be submitted no less than 9-12 months before 
departure.  The application requires approval by the 
Department of Global Education, which will then 
seek approval from the appropriate district leaders 
before obtaining final approval from the 
superintendent. Again, no arrangements should be 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 7 of 22 
 
made or payments or deposits placed without 
consultation with the Department of Global 
Education and formal application approval from the 
superintendent.  
o The principal/head of school or appointee and the 
director of Global Education or district designee are 
the emergency contacts for international travel 
programs.  
GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR ALL TYPES OF FIELD TRIPS 
● Principals/head of school or the district department 
sponsoring the trip have the primary responsibility to ensure 
that all procedures pertaining to field trips are followed by 
their school and establish clear and transparent internal 
protocols for field trip requests and approvals at the school 
level. 
● All field trip ideas must be preliminarily approved in writing 
by the principal/head of school or district department 
sponsoring the trip prior to the distribution of any 
informational materials on the proposed trip to students 
and their parents/guardians, and prior to fundraising efforts 
or other detailed preparations. Staff are not allowed to sign 
contracts on behalf of the Boston Public Schools. 
● The program leader (the BPS employee and chaperone 
organizing and leading the trip) and supporting chaperones 
must be approved by the principal/head of school, or district 
department sponsoring the trip.  
● The principal/head of school and program leader must 
review and complete the appropriate type of field trip 
circular and checklist throughout the planning process. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 8 of 22 
 
● Program leaders must consult with the principal/head of 
school on potential chaperones and student recruitment. 
Every effort should be made for students to have access to 
the field experience, and for chaperones to be 
representative of the student group and include males and 
females. The selection and approval of chaperones by the 
principal/head of school should be based on the individuals’ 
thorough knowledge of, and rapport with most of the 
student participants. Choose a chaperone team purposefully 
and wisely, considering strengths. Every adult on the trip 
must be a chaperone and have a clear role. 
STUDENT ACCESSIBILITY AND PARTICIPATION 
● Students not enrolled in the Boston Public Schools may not 
participate. 
● Essential participation criteria: The program leader and 
principal/head of school shall work together to establish 
essential participation criteria for the trip. The criteria should 
inform students and parents of all activities and risks 
associated with each itinerary activity and trip location to 
determine what accommodations or modifications may be 
needed for the student to participate successfully and safely 
in all or portions of the trip.  
● Student recruitment: Field trips must be advertised to all 
students (within the whole school, particular grade, 
class/subject, club, or program associated with the trip), 
regardless of their financial situation. Schools shall make 
every reasonable effort to make instructional field trips 
affordable for all students. A student’s ability to pay may not 
be a criterion for field trip participation. If students are 
charged individual fees for participation in a domestic 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 9 of 22 
 
instructional field trip that is directly linked to the 
curriculum and standards, the school or district should 
make every effort to provide scholarships where need is 
expressed.  
● Student accessibility: Students with English Learner status, 
504 plans, and/or IEPs cannot be denied access to field trips 
due to their status or ability. It is the responsibility of the 
school to ensure that all accommodations normally 
provided to a student as indicated in their educational plans 
are made available during a field trip, including medication. 
See Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 for information about 
medical dispensation on field trips.  
● School nurse and guidance counselor consultation: Before 
approval of a field trip, the lead chaperone must consult 
with the school leader to determine if and what type of 
medical assistance is needed for participating students. To 
ensure accessibility, this step is crucial, and must take place 
before the field trip is secured. For additional questions, 
please consult the Health Services Department. Additionally, 
to thoroughly support a student's participation in a field trip, 
at least six weeks before departure (much longer for 
international and overnight field trip programs), consult 
with, and when necessary, receive training from the school 
nurse regarding any students who have medical needs. Also 
consult with the school counselor regarding mental and 
behavioral health needs. If any student has a serious 
medical or mental health condition, be sure that their 
doctor is aware of the essential participation criteria and 
location of the trip and writes a letter indicating that the 
child may safely attend and participate in trip activities. 
Keep this document on file with other key permissions slips 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 10 of 22 
 
and medical forms. 
● Inclusivity: Program leaders must consider their student 
demographics when selecting field trip locations, sites, and 
activities. Specifically determine the impact the locations, 
sites, and activities may have on diverse populations such as 
students of color, EL students, students who identify with 
the LGBTQIA+ community, students with disabilities, those 
who may be in the minority during your field trip 
experience, and those students who belong to groups that 
have experienced marginalization in the location being 
visited. Program leaders must work to prepare students for 
sensitive experiences and ensure that the program is safe 
and inclusive for all students. Consult the Department of 
Global Education for resources if needed.  
● Inclusive accommodations: In collaboration with the 
student and their family, the program leader and 
principal/head of school shall work with transgender and 
gender-nonconforming students to provide 
accommodations (including rooming) that affirm the 
student’s gender identity while also ensuring safety for the 
student and group. Program leaders should work with 
students and families to make sure all travel documents 
(airline ticket, passport, etc.) reflect their legal names as 
listed on government issued identification, while all 
unofficial documents and materials may reflect the 
student’s preferred name. Please view additional rooming 
guidelines from the Office of Equity.  
● Student conduct: The BPS Code of Conduct applies on all 
field trips. BPS students and parents are required to sign a 
BPS Student Traveler & Family Agreement form regarding 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 11 of 22 
 
student conduct while participating in a BPS sponsored 
field trip. Participation in field trips may be denied to any 
student who has demonstrated disregard for the policies 
and rules of BPS or the school, immediately prior to or while 
on the field trip. Parents/guardians and students must be 
made aware of this policy in advance and communicated 
with throughout any processes involving their child not 
participating in a field trip. Following an investigation, if the 
program leader, in consult with the principal/head of school 
and central office staff, determines that a student’s conduct 
while on an overnight trip poses a risk to themselves or the 
safety of the group, or is no longer manageable by BPS staff 
in the field, the district reserves the right to request and 
arrange for that student to return home.  
The district also reserves the right to request that families 
assume responsibility for all, or a portion of the costs 
associated with their child’s return. Students may be subject 
to further disciplinary action and will be provided the 
opportunity to have a formal hearing at the school level 
upon return. The school must document the 
parent/guardian’s consent of this policy prior to the trip.  
● Student dismissal from field program: If a student is to be 
dismissed from an overnight field trip, the student’s 
parent/guardian must be notified in advance and should 
agree to meet the student at the airport or other agreed 
upon transportation destination. If the parent/guardian is 
not reachable, the student’s principal or appropriate school-
based point of contact must be notified and agree to meet 
the student at the airport or other agreed upon destination. 
Students under the age of 16 must be accompanied on their 
flight by a chaperone. Students over the age of 16 may fly 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 12 of 22 
 
unaccompanied, though a chaperone must accompany the 
student to the airport to ensure the student checks in for 
their flight. NOTE: Age requirements are subject to specific 
airline/train/bus guidelines.  
● Provisions for students not attending the trip: If applicable, 
alternative arrangements and/or comparable activities for 
students not attending the trip, or unable to participate in a 
portion of your trip, must be provided. If a student’s family 
elects for their child not to attend a field trip for any reason, 
the student may not be penalized through their grade or 
otherwise. 
● Attendance: Attendance forms should indicate when a 
student is physically absent from the school building on a 
field trip but participating in a school-sponsored program 
being conducted off school grounds. (Note: It is important to 
know and document where students are at all times.) 
CHAPERONE REQUIREMENTS 
● Chaperone Recruitment: Program leaders must consult 
with the principal/head of school on potential chaperones 
and student recruitment. The program leader (lead 
chaperone) must be a BPS employee. Other authorized 
chaperones may include parents and guardians who are 21 
years of age or older. Any parent on the trip must operate in 
the role of chaperone. All chaperones must be approved by 
the head of school/principal. Every effort should be made for 
students to have access to the field trip experience, for 
chaperones to be representative of the student group, and 
for chaperones to include males and females. The selection 
and approval of chaperones by the principal/head of school 
should be based on the individuals’ thorough knowledge of 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 13 of 22 
 
and rapport with most of the student participants. Choose a 
chaperone team purposefully and wisely, considering 
strengths. Every adult on the trip must be a chaperone and 
have a clear role. 
● Non-BPS Chaperones: Other authorized chaperones may 
include parents and volunteers who must be 21 years of age 
or older. All non-BPS employee chaperones must submit a 
yearly CORI/SORI authorization form to the Office of Human 
Capital. Complete the online eCORI form.  Contact the BPS 
Office of Human Capital (OHC) for CORI check and 
confirmation support. The principal/head of school and the 
lead chaperone are responsible for submitting authorization 
forms to OHC and must not allow chaperones to take part in 
activities until they have been CORI/SORI cleared. Non-BPS 
employees who chaperone on a field trip are not covered for 
liability by the Boston Public Schools. The program leader 
must be sure that all chaperones, including non-BPS 
chaperones, are familiar with the BPS Code of Conduct and 
other district and school-based rules. Non-BPS employee 
chaperones (parents/guardians) are required to show proof 
of COVID vaccination, or a negative COVID-19 test within 72 
hours of the field trip.  
● BPS Parent Chaperones: Chaperones who are 
parents/guardians of BPS students on the trip must provide 
the same level of care and attention to ALL student 
participants. If a BPS chaperone’s child who does not attend 
the participating school must attend the program, the child 
must be a BPS student and in the same grade or age range 
as participating students. In this case, the BPS parent 
chaperone is responsible for incurring all costs associated 
with their child’s participation. 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 14 of 22 
 
All chaperones must complete the Chaperone Agreement 
form.  
● Chaperone Ratios: The student-to-chaperone maximum 
ratios must be: 
o Day field trips: minimum of two chaperones  
o Grades K-5, 10:1 
o Grades 6 and up, 10:1 
o Domestic Overnight field trips: 10:1 (minimum of 
two chaperones) 
o International field trips: 7:1 (minimum of two 
chaperones) * Includes Puerto Rico 
NOTE: There should not be more chaperones than 
students, unless mandated by an educational plan or 
other circumstances approved by the principal/head 
of school and Department of Global Education. For 
students with disabilities, the ratio of staff to 
students must be at least the same as the ratio 
mandated in their IEPs for their classes. 
o NEW: Tour guides and employees of third-party 
vendors contracted to help operate the trip are 
not considered chaperones and do not factor into 
the student to chaperone ratio.  
PERMISSION FORMS  
● The student may not attend the field trip without a signed 
permission slip. Permission for field trips must be in written 
form only. Program leaders are responsible for seeing that 
permission slips are filled out completely and signed by the 
legal parent(s)/guardian(s). 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 15 of 22 
 
● Permission slips are legal documents and may not be 
altered. Permission slips must be used for any excursion that 
is school sponsored, including those scheduled after school 
and on weekends. 
● No staff member may solicit students for any privately 
arranged field trip or excursion without the permission of 
the principal/head of school. 
● “Blanket” authorization (i.e., parental/guardian approval 
using a single form for multiple trips to be taken during the 
school year) should never be allowed (except for the 
Walking Trips and Water Activities form if they are in the 
same location). A separate parent/guardian permission slip 
must be obtained and filed for each field trip.  
● Parental/guardian permission slips must be sent home in 
English and in the language of the home.  
● Only parents/guardians are authorized to sign permission 
forms. For questions regarding legal guardianship, refer to 
the SIS site or the local Welcome Center. 
● Check that students and their parents/guardians have 
signed the BPS Media Appearances release section of the 
Parent/Student Agreement document so that the trip may 
be showcased upon your return. (This document can be 
found in the Guide to the Boston Public Schools for Families 
and Students.) 
● Review each student's Emergency Information Card (Form 
460 or electronic equivalent) to ensure/cross-check 
accuracy of all field trip permissions and forms. 
● Program leaders must be specific when completing the 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 16 of 22 
 
school portion of the Parental Authorization for Field Trip 
form. Parents/guardians must be given sufficient 
information to understand the nature and scope of the 
activities on the itinerary. Additional customized waivers 
may be developed for specific trips/itineraries. 
RECORD KEEPING FOR ALL TYPES OF TRIPS 
● Retain completed field trip request forms, original 
permission slips, medical forms, fire prevention and safety 
forms (if applicable), and all other signed documents for 
field trips in the school office. Legally, these records must be 
kept for the current fiscal year plus three additional years 
after all field trips have occurred. 
 
 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 17 of 22 
 
TRANSPORTATION FOR FIELD TRIPS 
● School buses or BPS approved transportation vendors’ 
vehicles (per BPS Transportation Department) MUST be 
used to transport students to and from field trips or athletic 
events regardless of how the trip is paid for. Privately owned 
vehicles, vehicles from non-approved vendors are not 
permitted.  
Ride sharing transportation services, such as Uber and Lyft, or 
leased vans are not to be utilized to transport students to 
and from field trips or athletic events, except in the case of a 
bona fide emergency.  
● Students are prohibited from driving vehicles, operating, or 
being a passenger on any motorbike during a field trip. 
● Staff are not permitted to transport students. Staff who 
utilize their own vehicles, or leased vehicles, risk being 
legally liable if students are injured while riding in their 
automobiles. 
● Please refer to Superintendent’s Circular TRN-03 for 
information and regulations regarding field trip 
transportation. 
SAFETY GUIDELINES  
As part of trip planning and itinerary development, ensuring the 
major aspects of health, safety, and security have been addressed 
with appropriate due diligence. Program leaders should be able 
to articulate in an informed manner what decisions were made, 
why they were made, and the sources that informed their 
decision making. If you are unsure as to whether an activity is 
appropriate in terms of safety or educational content for a 
school-sponsored trip, please consult with your principal/head of 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 18 of 22 
 
school and the Department of Global Education. 
● Review Superintendent’s Circular FSE-05, Medical 
Emergency Management, and SAF-04 Incident Data-
Reporting and Release for important safety protocols.  
● Do not leave students alone. Students should be 
accompanied by chaperones unless part of a scheduled 
activity in which parents have been informed of and 
approved in writing in advance, and age appropriate. 
However, if unaccompanied as part of a scheduled and 
structured activity, students should at least be in groups of 
three, AND always know how to reach an adult chaperone. 
● Day and water field trips: The Department of Safety Services 
(617-635-8000) must be notified in the event of a serious 
medical or other emergency and should be used as a 
resource for questions regarding safety on day field trips, 
including water activity day trips. 
● Domestic overnight trips: The principal/head of school is the 
emergency contact and must be notified in the event of a 
serious medical or other emergency. Prior to departure, the 
Department of Global Education should be used as a 
resource for questions regarding safety on trips, and for 
support with insurance and claims. Prior to departure, 
program leaders will receive emergency contact 
information. 
● International trips: The principal/head of school or designee, 
followed by the Department of Global Education or district 
appointee, are the emergency contacts for international 
trips. DGE must be notified in the event of a serious medical 
or other emergency and should be used as a resource for 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 19 of 22 
 
questions regarding safety on trips. Prior to departure, 
program leaders will receive emergency contact 
information. 
● Emergency Action Plan: At all times during the trip, all 
chaperones must carry with them a copy of the Emergency 
Action Plan (EAP) that outlines procedures for calling 911 in 
the US or the foreign equivalent while abroad, as well as 
emergency protocols. The EAP can be found in the day, 
overnight, and international circulars.  
● Personal Health: For overnight and international trips, 
students and staff must have had a recent doctor’s visit, 
physical exam, and any required vaccinations prior to 
departure. See CAO-24 and CAO-25 for details on healthy 
travel requirements. 
● Training: The district reserves the right to require additional 
training and/or certifications such as CPR/AED, first aid, and 
program (chaperone) leader risk management training 
depending on the type, location, and purpose of the trip. 
Review the specific circular for your trip type for certification 
requirements.  
● Phone/Social Media Usage: Set expectations with students 
regarding phone and social media usage during any field 
trip. This is especially critical during an emergency. 
● Insurance: The district provides medical insurance coverage 
for BPS-sponsored international and domestic trips for BPS 
students and BPS staff participants. [Domestic is defined as 
100 driven miles away from home or place of study or 
employment.] Trip cancellation and interruption coverage 
are not provided by the district. Program leaders must 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 20 of 22 
 
inform families (and funders) of this fact, and that they have 
the option to voluntarily purchase these additional 
coverages on their own. For Level 2 CDC or State 
Department Warning international destinations, trip 
cancellation and interruption coverages are strongly 
recommended.  
● Cancellation: The superintendent reserves the right to 
cancel any field trip up to and including the day of 
departure to manage risk. Upon advance review of 
itineraries, BPS reserves the right to deny schools 
permission to participate in the field trip activities on their 
itinerary where the risks of the activity outweigh the 
intended learning outcomes of the program. 
● Post Field Trip: After the trip, follow up and communicate 
with the student and parent/guardian, as well as the 
principal/head of school, Department of Safety Services, or 
the Department of Global Education if there are any student 
safety concerns (health or otherwise) during the trip that 
require further attention. 
HOMESTAYS IN BOSTON, NATIONALLY, AND ABROAD  
● For host family stays (both incoming and outgoing), review 
CAO-26 Guidelines for Homestays & International Student 
Visitors for more information. Please contact the 
Department of Global Education immediately for guidelines. 
All BPS families (anyone in households 18 or over) who host 
national or international guests must be CORI cleared by the 
BPS Office of Human Capital.  
INTERNATIONAL STUDENT VISITORS (CAO-26)  
● International/ students can register with BPS if they will be a 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 21 of 22 
 
full-time student at a BPS school, except the exam schools, 
for one year. Students must be in their freshman, 
sophomore, or junior year. Please be advised that BPS does 
not get involved with the J1 visa process. Review CAO-26 
Guidelines for Homestays & International Student Visitors for 
more information. Please contact the Department of Global 
Education immediately for guidelines. 
● For visiting students, note immunization requirements for 
those visiting us from abroad. Work with the program leader 
(lead chaperone) from visiting schools to ensure all health 
regulations are met. See attached letter for directives from 
the Massachusetts Department of Public Health. 
http://www.mass.gov/eohhs/docs/dph/cdc/immunization/im
munization-requirements-exchange-and-visiting-
students.pdf 
WATER ACTIVITIES (CAO-27)  
● If your trip involves activities in, or on the water, you must 
contact the Department of Global Education immediately to 
submit a mandatory Water Activity Request form and to 
ensure that the site location for the water activity has up-to-
date insurance, liability, and certification documentation on 
file with the district. Refer to CAO-27 for specific guidelines 
for water activities.  
For more information, questions, and support about this 
circular, please contact: 
 Owner: 
Chief of Teaching and Learning 
Title: 
Director of Global Education 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
315-601-0292 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 22 of 22 
 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-23 
Version 01 
 
DAY FIELD TRIP GUIDELINES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
IMPORTANT NOTE: *These guidelines might be impacted by 
COVID-19 restrictions and are subject to change based on public 
health, international security, or other emergent issues that could 
impact travel.  For the most up-to-date information and 
guidance, contact the Department of Global Education 
(OPL@bostonpublicschools.org) for assistance/guidance.  
This Superintendent’s Circular provides instructions for 
implementing the Field Trip Policy passed by the Boston School 
Committee on November 20, 2019. 
This circular should be read AFTER Superintendent’s Circular 
CAO-22 General Guidelines and Procedures for All Field Trips, as 
additional guidelines are outlined there.  
The principal/head of school (and/or the district department 
sponsoring the trip) is responsible for ensuring that all field trip 
policies and procedures as outlined in this circular and CAO-22 
are adhered to.  
Together, the principal/head of school (and/or the district 
department lead sponsoring the trip) and the program leader 
(lead chaperone) must review and complete checklists for this 
circular. The signed checklist must be kept on file at the school. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 2 of 36 
 
A day field trip is any domestic trip off school grounds that is no 
more than one day in duration.  
 Day field trip forms are submitted to the principal/head of 
school AT LEAST 4 weeks in advance (or at the 
principal/head of school ’s discretion) and approved by the 
principal/head of school; school leaders reserve the right to 
cancel a trip for any reason and at any time for safety 
purposes. 
 Walking field trips are day field trips that require walking 
within a 1-mile radius of the school (e.g., local garden, park, 
field, etc.) The Parent/Guardian Authorization and 
Acknowledgement of Risks for Walking Trips form will apply 
for all walking field trips during the current school year. It 
must be updated each school year or as student/family 
information changes. The school is still required to inform 
families in advance of each walking field trip and obtain 
approval from the principal/head of school. All forms, 
including signed CAO-23 checklist form, are filed at the 
school. 
Applications: Schools shall communicate with families in 
advance when students leave school grounds and ensure written 
permission is received. 
Water Activities:  Organizers of trips that involve activities in or 
on the water as part of the curriculum must immediately contact 
the Department of Global Education for additional approval. 
There is a separate and mandatory procedure for all trips 
involving water. See Superintendent’s Circular CAO-27 for water 
activity guidelines. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 3 of 36 
 
DAY FIELD TRIP CHECKLIST  
(Checklist and request form must be completed for each day 
field trip.) 
 Review Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 General 
Guidelines and Procedures for All Field Trips. 
 Review Superintendent’s Circular FSE-05 Medical 
Emergency Management and SAF-04 Incident Data 
Reporting and Release for important safety protocols. The 
Department of Safety Services (617-635-8000) must be 
notified in the event of a serious emergency and should be 
used as a resource for questions regarding safety on field 
trips. 
 Select a site and investigate the appropriateness of the site 
in relation to the category of field trip. 
Field Trip Category(s) (see CAO-22):  _______________________  
Site(s): ____________________________________________________  
 Select a date and an alternate date. Note: Check with the 
principal/head of school, teachers, and staff to ensure that 
trips are not scheduled on dates that interfere with 
important tests, religious holidays, or class work. 
 
 
Date:  _____________________________________________________  
Alternate Date: ___________________________________________  
 All program leaders (the BPS employee organizing and 
leading the trip) must be approved by the principal/head of 
school or district department sponsoring the trip. 
 All field trip ideas must be preliminarily approved in writing 
by the principal/head of school or district department 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 4 of 36 
 
sponsoring the trip prior to the distribution of any 
informational materials on the proposed trip to students 
and their parents/guardians, and prior to any fundraising or 
other detailed preparations. Staff are not allowed to sign 
contracts on behalf of the Boston Public Schools. Consult 
with the principal/head of school on potential chaperones 
and student recruitment.  
 Planning, organization, and preparation are critical to a 
successful experience for all participants. As part of trip 
planning and itinerary development, ensure the major 
aspects of health, safety, student inclusion, and security 
have been addressed with due diligence. Program leaders 
must be able to articulate what decisions were made, why 
they were made, and the sources that informed that 
decision making. If you have questions about the 
appropriateness of an activity, please consult with your 
principal/head of school.  
 School nurse and guidance counselor consultation: Before 
approval of a field trip, the lead chaperone must consult 
with the school leader to determine if and what type of 
medical assistance is needed for participating students. To 
ensure accessibility, this step is crucial and must take place 
before the field trip is secured. For additional questions, 
please consult the Health Services Department. Additionally, 
to thoroughly support a student's participation in a field trip, 
at least six weeks before departure (much longer for 
international and overnight field trip programs), consult 
with and, when necessary, receive training from the school 
nurse regarding any students who have medical needs. Also 
consult with the school counselor regarding mental and 
behavioral health needs. If any student has a serious 
medical or mental health condition, be sure that their 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 5 of 36 
 
doctor is aware of the essential participation criteria and 
location of the trip and writes a letter indicating that the 
child may safely attend and participate in trip activities. 
Keep this document on file with other key permissions slips 
and medical forms. 
CHAPERONE REQUIREMENTS 
 Chaperone Recruitment: Program leaders must consult 
with the principal/head of school regarding potential 
chaperones and student recruitment. The program leader 
(lead chaperone) must be a BPS employee. Other 
authorized chaperones may include parents and guardians 
21 years of age or older. Any parent on the trip must operate 
in the role of chaperone. All chaperones must be approved 
by the head of school/principal. Every effort should be made 
for students to have access to the field trip experience, for 
chaperones to be representative of the student group, and 
for chaperones to include males and females. The selection 
and approval of chaperones by the principal/head of school 
should be based on the individuals’ thorough knowledge of 
and rapport with most of the student participants. Choose a 
chaperone team purposefully and wisely, considering 
strengths. Every adult on the trip must be a chaperone and 
have a clear role. 
 Non-BPS Chaperones: Other authorized chaperones may 
include parents and volunteers who are 21 years of age or 
older. All non-BPS employee chaperones must submit a 
yearly CORI/SORI authorization form to the Office of Human 
Capital. Complete the eCORI form. Contact the BPS Office of 
Human Capital (OHC) for CORI check and confirmation 
support. The principal/head of school and the lead 
chaperone are responsible for submitting authorization 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 6 of 36 
 
forms to OHC and must not allow chaperones to take part in 
activities until they have been CORI/SORI cleared. Non-BPS 
employees who chaperone on a field trip are not covered for 
liability by the Boston Public Schools. The program leader 
must be sure that all chaperones, including non-BPS 
chaperones, are familiar with the BPS Code of Conduct and 
other district and school-based rules.  
 BPS Parent Chaperones: Chaperones who are 
parents/guardians of BPS students on the trip must provide 
the same level of care and attention to ALL student 
participants. If a BPS chaperone’s child who does not attend 
the participating school must attend the program, the child 
must be a BPS student and in the same grade or age range 
as participating students. In this case, the BPS parent 
chaperone is responsible for incurring all costs associated 
with their child’s participation.  
 All chaperones must complete the Chaperone Agreement 
form.  
Chaperone Ratios:  
• A minimum of two chaperones is required.  
• Student-to-chaperone ratios are: 
o Grades K-5, 10:1   
o Grades 6 and up, 10:1 
• For students with IEPs, the ratio of staff to students must be 
at least the same as the ratio mandated in their IEPs for 
their classes. 
• For water activities: The student-to-chaperone ratio must 
remain 10:1 at all times during instructional swimming for all 
grade levels. This ratio does not include lifeguards on duty. If 
your trip involves activities on or in the water, you must 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 7 of 36 
 
contact the Department of Global Education for approval 
immediately. There is a separate, mandatory procedure for 
all trips involving water. See Superintendent’s Circular CAO-
27 for water activity guidelines. 
Chaperone Team: 
 The program leader/lead chaperone will meet with the 
chaperone team to delegate responsibilities and review the 
student team. The program leader will record the names of 
the chaperones and the students each chaperone is 
supervising. Each chaperone must carry this list. 
 Chaperones will organize a “buddy system,” pairing 
students with one another for safety purposes. 
 The lead chaperone will (1) review students’ permission slips; 
and (2) prepare any questions for follow-up with families 
and the school nurse and counselor.  
 The lead chaperone will prepare a trip binder for all 
chaperones (See “During the Trip” section which lists all 
binder contents).  
 The lead chaperone must carry original, signed Parental 
Authorization for Day Trip forms for all students; all other 
chaperones must carry copies. 
STUDENT PARTICIPATION 
 Participation Criteria: The program leader and 
principal/head of school will work together to establish (1) 
essential participation criteria for the trip that informs 
students and parents of all activities and risks associated 
with each itinerary activity; and (2) trip location, to 
determine what accommodations or modifications may 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 8 of 36 
 
need to be made for the student to successfully and safely 
participation in all, or portions of the trip. Discuss with 
students the trip’s purpose and learning goals in the weeks 
prior to the trip; plan to engage students in activities before, 
during, and after the trip so that the field trip learning 
potential is maximized. Set aside time to process student 
learning on the trip.  
 Recruitment: Students not enrolled in the Boston Public 
Schools may not participate. Field trips must be advertised 
to all students (within the whole school, particular grade, 
class/subject, club, or program associated with the trip) 
regardless of their financial situation. Schools shall make 
every reasonable effort to make instructional field trips 
affordable for all students.  
 Accommodations: English Learners and students with 504 
Plans and/or IEPs cannot be denied access to field trips due 
to their status or ability. It is the responsibility of the school 
to ensure that all accommodations normally provided to a 
student as indicated in their educational plans are made 
available during a field trip, including medication. To 
thoroughly support a student's participation in a field trip, at 
least six weeks before departure, consult with, and when 
necessary, receive training from (1) the school nurse 
regarding any students who have medical needs; and (2) the 
school counselor regarding mental and behavioral health 
needs. If any student has a serious medical condition, please 
be sure that their doctor writes a letter indicating that the 
child may safely attend and participate in trip activities. 
Ensure the availability of a first aid kit. 
 Inclusivity: Program leaders must consider their student 
demographics when selecting field trip locations, sites, and 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 9 of 36 
 
activities. Specifically determine the impact the locations, 
sites, and activities may have on diverse populations such as 
students of color, EL students, students who identify with 
the LGBTQIA+ community, students with disabilities, those 
who may be in the minority during your field trip 
experience, and those students who belong to groups that 
have experienced marginalization in the location being 
visited. Program leaders must work to prepare students for 
sensitive experiences and ensure that the program is safe 
and inclusive for all students.  
 Inclusive Accommodations: The program leader and 
principal/head of school will work with transgender and 
gender nonconforming students to provide 
accommodations (including rooming) that affirm the 
student’s gender identity while also ensuring safety. 
Program leaders should work with students and families to 
make sure all travel documents reflect their legal names as 
listed on government issued identification, while all 
unofficial documents and materials may reflect the 
student’s preferred name.  
 The BPS Code of Conduct applies on all field trips. Review 
conduct expectations with students in advance. 
DOCUMENTATION 
 Consult with the principal/head of school and nurse 
regarding the medical needs of potential participating 
students before you receive field trip approval (at least six 
weeks beforehand). Document notes from this consultation. 
 Complete and submit a Day Field Trip Request form and 
accompanying documents to obtain official consent from 
the principal/head of school to execute the trip.  


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 10 of 36 
 
 Create a school file to house all important documents: Day 
Field Trip Request form, student permission slips, and other 
signed documents. These documents must be kept on file 
for the current fiscal year plus three additional years after 
the trip has occurred. 
 Distribute and collect the Parental Authorization for Day 
Trip form for each participating student. 
 Contact the field trip site and ensure that the necessary 
arrangements are in place. 
 Share the trip details listed below with all teachers and 
other staff members so that they may plan accordingly:  
o Trip overview (purpose); destination; date of trip; roster 
o Chaperones’ names and roles in school community 
 Inform the food service manager or attendant whether 
students will return to school for lunch, or whether brown 
bag lunches should be prepared. Be mindful of any student 
food allergies. 
TRANSPORTATION  
 Develop transportation plans: mode of transportation, travel 
time, cost, etc. If applicable, be sure to note how and with 
whom the child will travel to and from field trip departure 
and pick-up locations. 
 Staff are not permitted to drive students. Privately owned 
vehicles from non-approved vendors, ride sharing services 
such as Lyft or Uber, or leased vehicles are not to be utilized 
except in the case of a bona fide emergency. Staff who 
utilize their own vehicles or a leased vehicle risk being 
legally liable. Please refer to TRN-03 for regulations on field 
trip transportation. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 11 of 36 
 
 If your trip is less than 100 driving miles in distance, please 
ensure ALL students have valid medical insurance that 
covers them while on this program. Record details of 
insurance on the Medical Information form. 
ONE WEEK PRIOR TO TRIP 
 Verify all arrangements, including transportation and 
reception at the site. 
 Prepare name tags for younger students. 
 Provisions must be made in advance for any student not 
attending the trip and staying at school. If applicable, 
provide alternative arrangements and/or comparable 
activities for students not attending the trip or unable to 
participate in a portion of your trip. 
 If a student’s family elects for their child not to attend a field 
trip for any reason, the child may not be penalized through 
their grade or otherwise. 
 Remind students and chaperones of safety and behavior 
expectations.  
 Notify/consult with the principal/head of school if trip plans 
have changed from the original field trip request. Prepare 
and leave a field trip package for the principal/head of 
school that includes CAO-23 checklist, Day Field Trip 
Request form, and permission slip copies. 
DURING THE FIELD TRIP 
 Take attendance and leave the current list of students 
attending the trip with the principal/head of school.  
 Record specific bus number and driver’s name and leave 
information with the principal/head of school, all 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 12 of 36 
 
chaperones, and, if age appropriate, students. 
 Chaperones must supervise all assigned students. Conduct 
head counts and buddy checks before embarking on your 
trip, throughout your trip, and before departing the field trip 
site for home. 
 Review standards for safety and behavior with students. 
 Chaperones must carry the trip binder at all times on the 
trip which includes the following: permission slips (original, 
signed permission slips must be carried by the lead 
chaperone), Emergency Action Plan, Day Field Trip Request 
form, and any accompanying itinerary details for this 
particular trip. 
 All students must have the contact information of 
chaperones and other necessary emergency and contact 
information.  
 Do not leave students alone. Students should be 
accompanied by chaperones unless part of a scheduled 
activity of which parents have been informed and have 
approved in writing in advance, and that is age appropriate. 
However, if unaccompanied as part of a scheduled and 
structured activity, students should be in at least pairs AND 
always know how to reach an adult chaperone. 
 Review with everyone where they are to go if separated 
from the group. 
 Program leaders and chaperones have the responsibility to 
modify the program to ensure the ongoing safety of 
travelers. Consult with principal/head of school and 
Department of Safety Services if this becomes necessary. 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 13 of 36 
 
AFTER THE FIELD TRIP (MANDATORY) 
 Retain completed, original Day Field Trip Request form, 
original permission slips, and any other signed documents 
for the field trip in the school office. These records must be 
kept for the current fiscal year plus three additional years 
after the field trip occurs. 
 Remind students (and inform parents/guardians) to see a 
doctor immediately if they are not feeling well after the trip 
and to inform the doctor of their experience. 
 If applicable, file and follow up with an Incident Report. 
AFTER THE FIELD TRIP (SUGGESTED) 
 Write thank you notes. 
 Present to the school and family community about the 
students’ observations while on the trip. 
 Conduct related creative and/or analytical projects to 
showcase student learning. 
 Write a news article about the trip for a local newspaper or 
website. 
 Email stories, journals, and pictures of your trip to the 
Department of Global Education. 
 Evaluate the trip. 
o Was the educational purpose of the trip served? 
o What were the highlights of the trip? 
o What might you do differently next time? 
o Are there any incidents or accidents to report? 
 
PLEASE SIGN THIS CHECKLIST, RETAIN A COPY FOR YOUR FILE, 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 14 of 36 
 
AND SUBMIT THE ORIGINAL TO THE SCHOOL OFFICE FOR 
FILING.  
Your signature indicates that you read and understand the 
policies in this circular and that they have been/will be followed, 
and all checklists throughout the trip planning and the trip 
implementation process have been or will be completed. 
School Name: ___________________________________________________  
Signature of Lead Chaperone: ___________________________________   
Date: ____________________________________________________________  
Signature of Principal/Head of School or Sponsoring District 
Department: ____________________________________________________  
Date: ____________________________________________________________  
 
 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 15 of 36 
 
For more information, questions, and support about this 
circular, please contact: 
 Owner: 
Chief of Teaching and Learning 
Department: 
Global Education  
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
315-601-0292 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
ATTACHMENTS: 
I. 
Day Field Trip Request Form 
II. 
Emergency Action Plan 
III. 
Parental Authorization for Day Field Trip 
IV. 
Parent/Guardian Authorization and Acknowledgement of 
Risks for Walking Trips 
V. 
Chaperone Agreement Form  
 
 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 16 of 36 
 
 
DAY FIELD TRIP REQUEST FORM (PART I) 
This form is submitted to the principal/head of school for 
approval. This form and all original permission slips are kept on 
file for the current fiscal year plus three additional years. 
 
SCHOOL INFORMATION 
School:  __________________________________________________________  
Date Submitted:  _________________________________________________  
 
OVERVIEW 
Number of Students:  ____________________________________________  
Number of Chaperones: (10:1 Ratio) _______________________________  
Destination/s:  ____________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Date of Trip:  _____________________________________________________  
Field Trip Category:_______________________________________________  
Overview of Trip/ Educational Purpose:   __________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Itinerary:   ________________________________________________________  


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 17 of 36 
 
 __________________________________________________________________  
SITE/S CONTACT INFORMATION  
(If you are visiting multiple places, please list all.) 
Site/s:  ____________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Address/s:  _______________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Site/s Contact Person:  ___________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Site/s Telephone Number & Email(s):  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 
 
 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 18 of 36 
 
 
DAY FIELD TRIP REQUEST FORM (PART II) 
SUPERVISION 
Program Leader (Lead Chaperone):  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Phone (during the trip):  __________________________________________  
Email:  ___________________________________________________________  
Names and phone numbers of all chaperones: (attach a separate 
document if necessary): 
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 
 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 19 of 36 
 
TRANSPORTATION 
Pick-up Location:   _______________________________________________  
Drop-off Location:  _______________________________________________  
Departure Time:   _________________________________________________  
Time Back at School:  _____________________________________________  
Method of Transportation:  _______________________________________  
Transportation Provider:  _________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Contact Information: (phone number and address)  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Staff may not drive students. Privately owned vehicles, ride 
sharing services, vehicles from non-approved vendors, or leased 
vehicles are not to be utilized to transport students to and from 
field trips, except in the case of a bona fide emergency. Staff who 
utilize their own vehicles risk being legally liable. Schools must 
use BPS buses or approved bus vendors regardless of how the 
trip is paid for. (See TRN-03) 
Total Cost:  _______________________________________________________  
Funding Source:  _________________________________________________  
Grant Number:  __________________________________________________  


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 20 of 36 
 
BEDF Account Code/Description:  ________________________________  
Approved by:  ____________________________________________________  
Principal/Head of School /Sponsoring District Department 
Date: ______________________________ 
                     
Your signature indicates that all policies outlined in this circular 
regarding day trips will be followed. 
 
 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 21 of 36 
 
 
EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN (EAP) 
The program leader and chaperones must have copies of this 
checklist during the trip.  
PROCEDURES FOR CALLING 911 ON A FIELD TRIP: 
 Do not leave the injured person alone or without an adult 
present. 
 REMAIN CALM. This helps the operator receive your 
information. 
 DIAL 911. Remember, you may need to access an outside line 
first. 
 Answer the dispatcher’s questions clearly and concisely. 
They will ask for all the relevant facts. The dispatcher will 
end the call when all of the information is verified. 
 Wait with the person until EMS arrives. 
 Paramedics will take over care of the person when they 
arrive. A chaperone must accompany any injured student in 
the ambulance and remain with the student until the 
parent/guardian arrives.  
NOTIFICATION OF INCIDENT 
 Call parent/guardian, principal/head of school, the 
Superintendent’s Office, and Department of Safety Services 
regarding the incident immediately.  
 File an Incident Report. 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 22 of 36 
 
 
Principal/Head of School Phone Numbers: 
 __________________________________________________________________  
Department of Safety Services: (617) 635-8000 
Additional Phone Numbers: ______________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 23 of 36 
 
 
PARENTAL AUTHORIZATION FOR DAY FIELD TRIPS  
BPS STAFF: 
 Use one form per trip, per student. 
 Complete the School Portion of form. 
 Send a copy home for parent/guardian and student 
signatures. 
 During the field trip, the signed, original form must be 
carried by the lead chaperone, copies by all other 
chaperones and a photocopy must be left on file in the 
school office. 
STUDENTS:        
 Complete the “Student Agreement” section. 
PARENT / LEGAL GUARDIAN, IF STUDENT IS UNDER 18 YEARS OF 
AGE; OR STUDENT, IF AT LEAST 18 YEARS OLD:  
 Complete the Authorization & Acknowledgement of Risks 
section.  
 Complete the “Medical Authorization” section. 
 
 


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 24 of 36 
 
PARENTAL AUTHORIZATION FOR DAY FIELD TRIPS 
To be completed by the school 
 
School Name: ____________________________________________________  
Student Name: ___________________________________________________  
Date(s) of Trip: ____________________________________________________  
Destination: ______________________________________________________  
Purpose(s):   ______________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
List of Activities:     ________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Supervision: (Check one) 
 Students will be directly supervised by adult chaperones on 
this trip at all times. 
 
 


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 25 of 36 
 
Mode of Transportation (check all that apply): 
□ Walking                            □ School bus                      □ MBTA                       
□ Other  __________________________________________________________  
Students will leave from:   
_________________________________________ at ____________________. 
                    (location)                                                      (time)        
 
Students will return to: (location) _________________________________  
at about (time)__________________.  
Chaperone(s) in Charge:  _________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________   
Chaperone/Student Ratio:  __________________________ (10:1 for all 
grades; minimum of two chaperones) 
STUDENT AGREEMENT 
While participating in this field trip, I understand I am 
representing BPS and my community. I understand that 
appropriate standards must be observed, and I will accept 
responsibility for maintaining good conduct and abide by school-
based rules and the Boston Public Schools’ Code of Conduct. 
Student signature _________________________ Date  _________________                     
 
 


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 26 of 36 
 
To be completed by the parent/guardian or student (if 18 or over): 
PARENT/GUARDIAN AUTHORIZATION AND 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF RISKS FOR  BPS DAY TRIPS 
I understand that my/my child’s participation in this field trip is 
voluntary and may expose me/my child to some risk(s).  I have 
read and understand the description of the field trip (on the first 
page of this form) and authorize myself/my child to participate in 
the planned components of the field trip. 
I assume full responsibility for any risk of personal or property 
damages arising out of or related to my/my child’s participation 
in this field trip, including any acts of negligence or otherwise 
from the moment that my student is under BPS supervision and 
throughout the duration of the trip. I further agree to indemnify 
and to hold harmless BPS and any of the individuals and other 
organizations associated with BPS in this field trip from any claim 
or liability arising out of my/my child’s participation in this field 
trip. I also understand that participation in the field trip will 
involve activities off school property; therefore, neither the 
Boston Public Schools, nor its employees nor volunteers, will have 
any responsibility for the condition and use of any non-school 
property. 
I understand that BPS is not responsible for my/my child’s 
supervision during such periods of time when I/my child may be 
absent from a BPS supervised activity. Such occasions are noted 
in the “Supervision” section in this agreement. I state that I 
have/my child has read and agree(s) to abide by the terms and 
conditions set forth in the BPS Code of Conduct, and to abide by 
all decisions made by teachers, staff, and those in authority. I 
agree that BPS has the right to enforce these rules, standards, 
and instructions. I agree that my/my child’s participation in this 


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 27 of 36 
 
field trip may at any time be terminated by BPS in the light of 
my/my child’s failure to follow these regulations, or for any reason 
which BPS may deem to be in the best interest of a student 
group, and that I/my child may be sent home at my own expense 
with no refund as a result. In addition, chaperones may alter trip 
activities to enhance individual and/or group safety. 
MEDICAL AUTHORIZATION 
I certify that I am/my child is in good physical and behavioral 
health, and I have/my child has no special medical or physical 
conditions which would impede participation in this field trip. I 
agree to disclose to BPS any medications (including over- the-
counter/herbal) and/or prescriptions which I/my child shall or 
should take at any time during the duration of the field trip. In 
the event of serious illness or injury to my child/ward, I expressly 
consent by my signature to the administration of emergency 
medical care, if in the opinion of attending medical personnel, 
such action is advisable.   
Further, I authorize the chaperones listed to act on my behalf as 
parent/guardian of my child/ward while participating in the trip 
described above, including the admittance to and release from a 
medical facility. 
          NO: My child DOES NOT require medication during this trip. 
          YES: My child DOES require medication during this 
authorized trip.  
If you checked yes, please describe in the space below the type of 
medication and the required administration of this medication. If 
medication is taken on an as-needed basis, specify the symptoms 
or conditions when medication is to be taken and the time at 
which it may be given again. If necessary, attach an additional 


Page 28:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 28 of 36 
 
page. 
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
SIGNATURES 
If the applicant is at least 18 years of age, the following 
statement must be read and signed by the student: 
I certify that I am at least 18 years of age, that I have read and that 
I understand the above Agreement, and that I accept and will be 
bound by its terms and conditions. 
Student Signature: _______________________________________________  
Date: _____________________________________________________________  
If the applicant is under 18 years of age, the following statement 
must be read and signed by the student’s parent or legal 
guardian: 
I certify that I am the parent and legal guardian of the applicant, 
that I have read and that I understand the above agreement, and 
that I accept and will be bound by its terms and conditions on my 
own behalf and on behalf of the student. 
 
I give permission for:  
____________________________________________________________ 
(student) 


Page 29:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 29 of 36 
 
to participate in all aspects of this trip.                                                                  
Parent/Guardian Signature/s _____________________________________  
Date: _____________________________________________________________  
 
The student, if at least 18 years of age, or the parent/legal 
guardian must complete the information below: 
Print parent/guardian/s first and last name(s): 
 __________________________________________________________________  
Address:  _________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Telephone: (CELL, HOME, WORK): ________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Emergency contact’s first and last name (other than 
parent/guardians):  _______________________________________________  
Relationship to Student:  _________________________________________                     
Emergency Contacts Telephone #s: ______________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 
 
WALKING TRIPS  


Page 30:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 30 of 36 
 
Parent/Guardian Authorization and Acknowledgement of Risks 
for Walking Trips 
Instructions: This form is to be completed by parents/guardians 
to authorize BPS to engage students in day field trips that 
require walking within a 1-mile radius of the school. This form will 
apply for all walking field trips during the current school year, 
and will need to be updated each school year, or as 
student/family information changes. The school is still required 
to inform families in advance of walking field trips, and obtain 
principal/head of school approval.  
I understand that my/my child’s participation in this field trip is 
voluntary and may expose me/my child to some risk(s). I have 
read and understand the description of the field trip (on the front 
page of this form) and authorize myself/my child to participate in 
the planned components of the field trip. I assume full 
responsibility for any risk of personal or property damages arising 
out of or related to my/my child’s participation in this field trip, 
including any acts of negligence or otherwise from the moment 
that my student is under BPS supervision and throughout the 
duration of the trip. I further agree to indemnify and to hold 
harmless BPS and any of the individuals and other organizations 
associated with BPS in this field trip from any claim or liability 
arising out of my/my child’s participation in this field trip. I also 
understand that participation in the field trip will involve 
activities off of school property; therefore, neither the Boston 
Public Schools, nor its employees nor volunteers, will have any 
responsibility for the condition and use of any non-school 
property. I understand that BPS is not responsible for my/my 
child’s supervision during such periods of time when I/my child 
may be absent from a BPS supervised activity. Such occasions are 
noted in the “Supervision” section in this agreement. I state that I 


Page 31:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 31 of 36 
 
have/my child has read and agree(s) to abide by the terms and 
conditions set forth in the BPS Code of Conduct, and to abide by 
all decisions made by teachers, staff, and those in authority. I 
agree that BPS has the right to enforce these rules, standards, 
and instructions. I agree that my/my child’s participation in this 
field trip may at any time be terminated by BPS in the light of 
my/my child’s failure to follow these regulations, or for any reason 
which BPS may deem to be in the best interest of a student 
group, and that I/my child may be sent home at my own expense 
with no refund as a result.  In addition, chaperones may alter trip 
activities to enhance individual and/or group safety. 
MEDICAL AUTHORIZATION 
I certify that I am/my child is in good physical and behavioral 
health and I have/my child has no special medical or physical 
conditions which would impede participation in this field trip. I 
agree to disclose to BPS any medications (including over- the-
counter/herbal) and/or prescriptions which I/my child shall or 
should take at any time during the duration of the field trip. In 
the event of serious illness or injury to my child/ward, I expressly 
consent by my signature to the administration of emergency 
medical care, if in the opinion of attending medical personnel, 
such action is advisable.  Further, I authorize the chaperones 
listed to act on my behalf as parent/guardian of my child/ward 
while participating in the trip described above, including the 
admittance to and release from a medical facility. 
          NO: My child DOES NOT require medication during this trip. 
          YES: My child DOES require medication during this 
authorized trip.  
If you checked yes, please describe in the space below the type of 


Page 32:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 32 of 36 
 
medication and the required administration of this medication. If 
medication is taken on an as-needed basis, specify the symptoms 
or conditions when medication is to be taken and the time at 
which it may be given again. If necessary, attach an additional 
page. 
 
 
 


Page 33:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 33 of 36 
 
SIGNATURES 
If the applicant is at least 18 years of age, the following 
statement must be read and signed by the student: 
I certify that I am at least 18 years of age, that I have read and that 
I understand the above Agreement, and that I accept and will be 
bound by its terms and conditions. 
Student Signature: _______________________________________________  
Date: ___________________________ 
If the applicant is under 18 years of age, the following statement 
must be read and signed by the student’s parent or legal 
guardian: 
I certify that I am the parent and legal guardian of the applicant, 
that I have read and that I understand the above Agreement, and 
that I accept and will be bound by its terms and conditions on my 
own behalf and on behalf of the student. 
 
I give permission for:  _____________________________________________  
(student) 
to participate in all aspects of this trip. 
Parent/Guardian Signature/s: _____________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Date: ___________________________________ 
 
The student, if at least 18 years of age, or the parent/legal 


Page 34:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 34 of 36 
 
guardian must complete the information below: 
Print Parent/Guardian/s First and Last Name/s: 
 __________________________________________________________________  
Address:   ________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Telephone: (CELL, HOME, WORK): ________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Emergency Contact’s First and Last Name (other than 
parent/guardians): _______________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Relationship to Student:  _________________________________________  
Emergency Contacts Telephone #s: ______________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 
 


Page 35:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 35 of 36 
 
 
BPS CHAPERONE AGREEMENT FORM 
This form is to be completed by all chaperones of BPS sponsored 
field trips and submitted to the program leader (lead 
chaperone). 
 
School Name:  ____________________________________________________  
Destination: ______________________________________________________  
Departure Date: _________________ Return Date: ___________________  
All chaperones must agree to abide by the following code of 
conduct to participate in a BPS sponsored field trip.  
SAFETY & RESPONSIBILITY 
I understand that my safety, and the safety of other participants, 
is extremely important during this field trip. I agree to make 
safety my first priority. I agree to conduct myself in a manner that 
promotes my safety and the safety of others at all times. I 
understand that maintaining students’ safety requires that 
students must be supervised by me and/or other chaperones at 
all times while students are engaged in field trip activities. For 
overnight and international field trips, I understand that 
nighttime curfews and room checks for students, as well as 
morning wake up calls for students, are part of my responsibility. 
I agree to follow BPS policies, protocols, and guidance of BPS 
staff when in the field.  
 


Page 36:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-23 
Page 36 of 36 
 
DRUG & ALCOHOL POLICY  
I understand that the BPS Code of Conduct prohibits students 
from possessing, using, selling, and/or distributing any of the 
following on all domestic and international field trips: 
Alcohol; marijuana, non-prescribed controlled substances, 
imitation controlled substances, inhalants, other intoxicants, 
controlled or drug paraphernalia; unauthorized possession, use or 
distribution of over the counter medication; and selling of 
prescription drugs.  
The Code also prohibits the use of tobacco products (including e-
cigarettes, hookah paraphernalia, and vapor cigarettes). I 
understand that these prohibitions apply to all students, 
regardless of age.  
I understand that I am forbidden to use or visibly be in possession 
of tobacco in the presence of students. I also understand that the 
use of all other drugs, including alcohol, and weapons are strictly 
prohibited on the field trip.  
 
Chaperone Name (Printed): ______________________________________  
Chaperone Signature:  ___________________________________________  
Date: _________________________ 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-07 
Version 01 
 
 
 
MASSCORE GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Boston Public Schools (BPS) has a priority to create policies and 
practices that support the preparation of every student to be 
college, career, and life ready while removing barriers that 
prevent students from graduating from BPS. Accordingly, it is 
imperative that BPS utilize standards-aligned graduation 
requirements across the district that will promote and ensure 
rigor and excellence in our schools, resulting in the elimination of 
opportunity and achievement gaps and ensuring that every 
student graduates prepared for life after high school.  
Approved by the Boston School Committee in May of 2021, 
Boston Public Schools (BPS) adopted the MassCore Course of 
Study as its graduation requirement for all students in the 
district. The requirements will begin for students entering 9th 
grade in School Year 2022-2023 (SY22-23), with full 
implementation by the start of SY25-26. This circular outlines the 
details of graduation course requirements, alignment to DESE 
standards and state graduation requirements, and the course 
waiver process. 
GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 
Beginning with grade 9 in SY23-24, the following credits in 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-07 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 
various content categories are required for graduation from BPS. 
The table below visually represents the course requirements for 
graduation:  
MassCore Framework 
Massachusetts High School Program of Studies 
Content 
Category 
Units 
Notes 
English 
Language Arts 
4 Units 
ESL courses for students designated as ELD 1, 2 
or 3 will count toward ELA credits 
Mathematics 
4 Units 
Including completion of Algebra II or 
Integrated Mathematics III. A mathematics 
course during senior year is recommended for 
all students.  
Science 
3 Units 
of lab-
based 
science 
Coursework in technology/engineering courses 
may also count for MassCore science credit.  
History and 
Social Science 
3 Units 
Including U.S. History and World History and 
one additional core or MassCore elective. 
 
Inclusion of an Ethnic Studies course is strongly 
encouraged. 
Foreign 
Language 
2 Units 
Both units must be in the same language. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-07 
Page 3 of 6 
 
 
Physical 
Education 
1 unit, as 
required 
by law 
Students will have one quarter course (or its 
equivalent) of PE per year or an equivalent.  
 
Arts 
1 Unit 
Students will have one quarter course (or its 
equivalent) of Art per year or a cumulative unit.  
Additional 
Core Courses 
5 Units 
Inclusive of PE (1 credit) plus four additional 
courses. Other additional coursework 
(including Health Education* & Career and 
Technical Education) or any of the above. 
*Health Education: The BPS Wellness Policy requires 1 semester 
(at least ¼ course equivalent) of Health Education in high 
school. 
STATE GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 
The policy does not and will not replace state laws and DESE 
regulations pertaining to high school graduation. These 
additional requirements include, but are not limited to: 
• Action Civics Projects required by Chapter 296 of the Acts of 
2018, An Act to promote and enhance civic engagement. 
• Earning a “competency determination” [passing scores on 
the Grade 10 English language arts and mathematics and 
high school level science and technology/engineering 
Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS) 
tests]. For students who do not pass an MCAS test, 
educators develop an Educational Proficiency Plan (EPP) for 
the subject(s). Students need to meet course requirements 
for their EPP in addition to meeting MassCore requirements. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-07 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 
SUBSTITUTIONS 
The following substitutions may be used to meet graduation 
requirements without an additional waiver: 
Physical Education 
MassCore reflects the legal requirement that physical education 
be taught as a required subject in all grades. The BPS Wellness 
Policy requires all schools to offer high quality physical education 
for students in all grades. Under some circumstances, students 
can meet the requirement through an approved organized 
program of instructional physical activity, including but not 
limited to: participation in interscholastic athletics, skating, 
hockey, dance, yoga, martial arts, capoeira, or swimming; and any 
physical activity through school based or community programs, 
or independent study. Substitutions and independent study 
opportunities must be approved by the Office of Health and 
Wellness.  
Computer Science 
Students may substitute one unit of Computer Science (AP 
Computer Science Principles, Computer Science Principles, or 
Exploring Computer Science) that includes rigorous 
mathematical concepts and aligns with the Digital Literacy and 
Computer Science standards for a mathematics course.  
Humanities Course 
Double-blocked Humanities courses may count toward 1 ELA 
credit and 1 History credit. One period Humanities courses count 
as 1 History credit and cannot be used toward ELA credit.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-07 
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
Career and Technical Education 
Students enrolled in a DESE approved Chapter 74 program can 
fulfill MassCore requirements without fulfilling arts and world 
language requirements. While arts and world language 
requirements may be waived, students are strongly encouraged 
to take these courses to comply with college admission 
requirements.  
Credit for Courses in Grades 7 and 8 
Students will be able to apply high school credits for high school 
level courses completed successfully in 7th or 8th grade. 
World Language Competency  
Multilingual learners may earn up to two World Language credits 
for demonstrated competency in their native language by 
achieving Intermediate Mid Level of language proficiency on the 
AVANT Stamp Assessment. The AVANT Stamp administration will 
be administered at the BPS Welcome Center in the fall and 
spring of each year. Students scoring at the Intermediate High 
Level of language proficiency can utilize the assessment results 
towards attainment of the MA State Seal of Biliteracy upon 
graduation if they also meet the minimum criteria for English 
language proficiency set forth by the Massachusetts Department 
of Elementary and Secondary Education.  
Course Waiver Process 
Schools may seek additional waivers for individual students or 
courses.  
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-07 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION 
• Each school will collaborate with the Academics team on 
ensuring alignment of its course schedule with MassCore 
requirements. 
• All 9th grade students should follow the recommended 
course sequence and must take at least a quarter of physical 
education in SY23-24. 
• Schools should work with districts on ensuring they have 
the proper staffing model to meet MassCore requirements, 
especially for students in grade 9.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Elementary Superintendent 
Department: 
Academics and Professional Learning 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-6053 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-27 
Version 01 
 
GENERAL GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES FOR 
WATER ACTIVITIES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
IMPORTANT NOTE: These guidelines might be impacted by 
COVID-19 restrictions and are subject to change based on public 
health, international security, or other emergent issues that could 
impact travel. For the most up-to-date information and guidance, 
contact OPL@bostonpublicschools.org for assistance/guidance.  
 
This Superintendent’s Circular provides instructions for 
implementing the Field Trip Policy passed by the Boston School 
Committee on November 20, 2019. 
This circular MUST be read in its entirety by program leaders 
(chaperones), principal/head of school and/or the district 
department sponsoring a field trip that includes an IN the water 
or ON the water activity. These parties are responsible for 
ensuring that all field trip policies and procedures as outlined in 
this circular AND all applicable field trip circulars (CAO-23, 24, 
and 25) are adhered to. 
WATER ACTIVITIES 
• If your trip involves ON or IN water activities, you must 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-27 
Page 2 of 13 
 
contact the Department of Global Education immediately 
to submit a mandatory Water Activity Request Form 16 
weeks in advance to ensure that the site location for the 
water activity has up-to-date insurance, a safety plan, and 
certification documentation on file with the district. 
• For water activities: The student-to-chaperone ratio must 
remain 10:1 at all times during swimming for all grade 
levels. (This ratio does not include the lifeguards on duty.) 
SWIMMING (IN THE WATER) 
• Instructional swimming is permitted only if proper 
swimmer-lifeguard ratios are maintained (20:1); the 
swimming teachers hold valid American Red Cross or 
YMCA Lifeguard Instruction/ Water Safety Instruction, 
CPR/AED, and First Aid certificates; the site is nationally 
recognized for swim instruction (e.g., YMCA); and 
parents/guardians are informed in the appropriate 
Parental Authorization for Field Trip form. 
Parents/guardians must be given sufficient information 
to understand the nature and scope of the activity(s).  
• Principal/head of school is responsible for ensuring these 
requirements are met and must receive written 
documentation of all listed guard and instructor 
certifications. Copies of these certifications, along with 
students’ permission slips, must be kept on file for the 
current fiscal year plus three additional years. 
• Therapeutic/adaptive swimming for students with 
disabilities is permitted only with individuals with 
Therapeutic/Adaptive Swim certification or licensure 
and proper swimmer-lifeguard ratios are maintained 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-27 
Page 3 of 13 
 
(10:1); and parents/guardians are informed in the 
appropriate Parental Authorization for Field Trip form. 
Parents/guardians must be given sufficient information 
to understand the nature and scope of the activity(s). 
• Recreational swimming is NOT permitted on BPS field 
trips.  
WATER ACTIVITIES (ON THE WATER) 
• Water activities are permitted involving larger 
commercial or passenger vessels which meet U.S. Coast 
Guard standards for safety and hold a valid Certification of 
Compliance for the state or its international equivalent 
(Please note: There must be one life jacket per 
passenger). In addition, be sure the water-related activity 
is clearly listed in the appropriate Parental Authorization 
for Field Trip form. Parents/guardians must be given 
sufficient information to understand the nature and 
scope of the activity(s). 
• Water activities such as kayaking, rowing, and canoeing 
(or the equivalent where the movement of a craft 
depends on the physical endurance of its operator) and 
travel in small watercraft are not permitted on a BPS field 
trip unless a request is submitted and approved by the 
district. (Please note: There must be one life jacket per 
passenger.) These requests are submitted to and 
reviewed by the Department of Global Education. 
Significant lead time is needed (16 weeks or more) to 
allow for safety requirements to be met. 
• The sponsoring water venue/facility must provide the 
following documents to the district annually: 1) Safety 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-27 
Page 4 of 13 
 
Plan; 2) Liability Insurance; and 3) Lifeguard Certification.  
CHAPERONE REQUIREMENTS: 
• The program leader (lead chaperone) must be a BPS 
employee.  Other authorized chaperones may include 
parents and guardians 21 years of age or older.  
• Chaperones must be equipped with hand sanitizer and 
additional masks if the need arises for staff and students.  
• All chaperones must complete the Chaperone Agreement 
Form.  
• All non-BPS employee chaperones must submit a 
yearly CORI/SORI authorization form to the Office of 
Human Capital. Complete the eCORI form online at this 
link. Contact the BPS Office of Human Capital (OHC) for 
CORI check and confirmation support.  The 
principal/head of school and the lead chaperone are 
responsible for submitting authorization forms to OHC 
and must not allow chaperones to take part in activities 
until they have been CORI/SORI cleared. Non-BPS 
employee chaperones (parents/guardians) must show 
proof of vaccination or a negative COVID-19 test within 24 
hours of the field trip. Non-BPS employees who 
chaperone on a field trip are not covered for liability by 
the Boston Public Schools. 
• The program leader must be sure that all chaperones, 
including non-BPS chaperones, are informed of, adhere 
to, and uphold the BPS Code of Conduct and other 
district and school-based rules. 
• Chaperones who are parents/guardians of BPS students 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-27 
Page 5 of 13 
 
on the trip must provide the same level of care and 
attention to ALL student participants. If a BPS 
chaperone’s child who does not attend the participating 
school must attend the program, the child must be a BPS 
student and in the same grade or age range as 
participating students. In this case, the BPS employee is 
responsible for incurring all costs associated with their 
child’s participation.  
• Tour guides and employees of third-party vendors 
contracted to help operate the trip are not considered 
chaperones and do not factor into the student-to-
chaperone ratio.   
➤ For Day & Water Field Trips, the Department of Safety Services 
(617-635-8000), must be notified in the event of a serious medical 
or other emergency and should be used as a resource for 
questions regarding safety on day field trips, including WATER 
ACTIVITY day trips. 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-27 
Page 6 of 13 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
 Owner: 
Chief of Teaching and Learning 
Department: 
Department of Global Education  
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
315-601-0292 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
   
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-27 
Page 7 of 13 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
WATER ACTIVITY REQUEST FORM 
 
DIRECTIONS:   
1. This form must be submitted for water activities at least 
16 weeks in advance for the proposed water activity to be 
considered.  Please email this form to 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org and confirm its receipt.   
2. One form should be completed per field trip. However, if 
there are multiple “water activities” planned, each water 
experience must be listed separately. For example, if you 
are taking students on a service-learning trip for one 
week and would like students to participate in a water 
activity on multiple days, each separate excursion should 
be listed, even if the excursion is at the same location.   
3. Requests will be reviewed and schools will receive an 
answer regarding their requests in 2-3 weeks.  
 
TO BE COMPLETED BY THE PRINCIPAL/HEAD OF SCHOOL 
Date request submitted:  _________________________________________                     
Date(s) of field trip: _______________________________________________  
School: ___________________________________________________________  
 
Principal/Head of School /District Department Name: 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-27 
Page 8 of 13 
 
 __________________________________________________________________  
Trip leader’s name, role, and contact number: 
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Chaperones’ names and roles in school: 
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Vendor/Organization: ____________________________________________  
What is the purpose of the water activity? How does the water 
activity add to the overall trip experience?________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Number of students participating in the field trip: ________________  
Grade level and ages of students: _________________________________  


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-27 
Page 9 of 13 
 
 
Please complete the information below for each water activity 
planned for students: 
 
Water Activity # ________ 
Date 
 
Hours 
 
Water Activity 
Location 
(Address) 
 
 
Water Activity 
(i.e., canoeing) 
 
Site Contact 
Person 
 
 
Site Contact’s 
Email & Phone # 
 
 
Water Activity # _______ 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-27 
Page 10 of 13 
 
Date 
 
Hours 
 
Water Activity 
Location 
(Address) 
 
 
Water Activity 
(i.e., canoeing) 
 
Site Contact 
Person 
 
 
Site Contact’s 
Email & Phone # 
 
 
 
 
 
Principal/Head of School /District Department’s Signature      
 
Date: ________________________________ 
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-27 
Page 11 of 13 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
WATER ACTIVITY ADDENDUM TO PARENTAL AUTHORIZATION 
FIELD TRIP FORM FOR “ON” WATER ACTIVITIES 
Directions: 
1. This form must be used if a water activity such as kayaking, 
rowing, or canoeing, or riding on a boat is listed as a possible 
activity on the Attached Parental Authorization Field Trip 
form for this field trip. 
2. Complete the school portion of this form and attach it to the 
appropriate Parental Authorization Field Trip form for 
parent/guardian.  
Parent/legal guardian, if student is under 18 years of age, or 
student, if at least 18 years old: Complete the Authorization & 
Acknowledgement of Risk Section. 
➤ If a student does not wear a life jacket, the student may not 
participate in the water activity. 
School Name:  ____________________________________________________  
Student Name: ___________________________________________________  
Date(s) of Trip: ____________________________________________________  
Water Activity Location(s): ________________________________________  
List of Water Activities:  __________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-27 
Page 12 of 13 
 
AUTHORIZATION AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF RISKS 
I understand that participation in this field trip may involve water 
activities, including but not limited to boating. I understand that 
participation in these activities is voluntary and may expose 
me/my child to some risks(s). I assume responsibility for any risk 
of personal or property damages arising out of or related to 
my/my child’s participation in this boating and/or other water 
related activity, including acts of negligence or otherwise. I 
further agree to hold harmless BPS and any of the individuals 
and other organizations associated with BPS in this activity from 
any claim or liability arising out of my/my child’s participation in 
this activity. I authorize myself/my child to participate in the 
planned components of the field trip to the extent indicated by 
my signature below. 
➤ If the applicant is at least 18 years of age, the following 
statement must be read and signed by the student: 
I certify that I am at least 18 years of age, that I have read and 
understand the above Agreement, and that I accept and will be 
bound by its terms and conditions.  
 
 ________________________________________________________________  ____________________________ 
Student Signature                         
Date 
 
 
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-27 
Page 13 of 13 
 
➤ If the applicant is under 18 years of age, the following 
statement must be read and signed by the student’s parent or 
legal guardian: 
I certify that I am the parent/legal guardian of the applicant, 
that I have read and understand the above Agreement, and that 
I accept and will be bound by its terms and conditions on my 
own behalf and on behalf of the student.  
 
 ________________________________________________________________  ____________________________ 
Parent/Guardian Signature                         
Date 
 
Emergency Contact’s Name (other than parent/guardian): 
 __________________________________________________________________  
Relationship to Student:  _________________________________________  
Emergency Contact’s Telephone Number:  _______________________  


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 
NUMBER: 
CAO-06 
Version 01 
 
 
 
 GRADE POINT AVERAGE CALCULATION METHOD 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
RATIONALE 
The purpose of this document is to outline how grade point 
averages (GPAs) are calculated and used within the Boston 
Public Schools. 
DEFINITION 
The grade point average (GPA) is a standard numerical 
conversion of letter grades given to a student. The GPA is a 
standard method of comparing the cumulative academic 
performance of students in grades 9-12 and sharing that 
information. The GPA is used for several purposes such as college 
admissions, high school ranking, and selective program 
admissions. The GPA calculation takes in a variety of information 
from courses such as credits and academic level.   
GPA CALCULATIONS 
Use the following steps to complete the weighted GPA 
calculation:  
Step 1. Convert each final grade (numeric or letter grade) to 
its equivalent on the 4.0 scale.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-06 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
 
Step 2. Weight grades by adding .5 to each converted grade 
earned in an Honors level course and 1.0 to each converted 
grade earned in Advanced Placement or Dual Enrollment 
course.  
Step 3. Multiply each converted grade or, if applicable, each 
weighted grade by the course credits earned. Where a full-
year course equals 1 credit; a semester course equals .5 
credits; a quarter course equals .25 credits. 
Step 4. Sum all the weighted grade points from Step 3.  
Step 5. Divide total from Step 4 by total number of course 
credits attempted.  Where a full-year course equals 1 credit; 
a semester course equals .5 credits; a quarter course 
equals .25 credits. 
Step 6. The quotient is the student's weighted GPA. 
GPA = Total (Point + Weight) * Credit) for all courses / Total 
Credits for all courses 
COURSE INFORMATION 
1. Course 
a. Student courses taken in grades 9-12 will be included in 
the GPA calculation. High school level courses taken by 
a student in middle school grades will not be included 
in the calculation.  
b. Include in GPA or InGPA flag 
c. This indicator describes the courses that will be 
included in any academic GPA calculation. Courses 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-06 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
 
that are required for graduation are included in GPA 
calculations. Courses that typically are excluded from 
academic GPA calculations include enrichment 
courses, functional courses, study periods and 
administration blocks such as lunch. The district 
determines which courses are included within a 
student’s GPA calculation, additionally such courses 
may also be required by schools for graduation. The 
Division of Academics maintains and updates the list of 
all applicable courses to be included in the GPA 
calculation. School users can find InGPA information in 
the Course Catalog feature in Aspen. 
2. Credits 
a. Credits describe the number of ‘points’ that a course 
will receive in a GPA after the course is completed. In 
general, most courses will have 1 credit. However, 
certain courses may have more than 1 credit, such as 
double-blocked humanities courses. Similarly, some 
courses have fewer than 1 credit, such as 1 semester 
(half-year) courses. In the cumulative GPA calculation 
within a school year, quarter or term grades for a 1 
semester course will be attributed .25 credits in the 
GPA calculation. 
b. Credits are generally distributed based on the 
successful completion of the competencies of the 
course. 
c. Transfer-in credits are credits that a student earns in a 
setting outside of BPS. These credits are included on a 
student’s transcript and count towards a school’s 
graduation requirements. Therefore, these credits will 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-06 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
 
be used in the GPA calculation. This is in alignment 
with the Massachusetts Board of Higher Education’s 
(MA BHE) process of calculating GPAs.  
3. Academic level 
a. The academic level of a course can be one of 8 options 
(see table below). 
b. Weights are applied to courses through the academic 
level of the course. The following weights are given to 
each academic level based on the MA Board of Higher 
Education recommendations (Link to full weighting 
chart). 
 
Weighting 
Course Academic Level 
Not included 
Functional 
Untracked 
 
+0 (standard) 
Regular 
 
 
+0.5 
Honors 
IB MYP 
 
+1.0 
College 
AP 
IB DP 
 
GPA CALCULATION DATES (BPS CALENDAR) 
The GPA calculation dates for SY24 can be found here.  
GPA INCLUDED IN TRANSCRIPT 
While there are several GPA calculations in Aspen, only the 
cumulative weighted academic GPA calculation is included on a 
student’s official transcript. The quarter, semester, and final GPAs 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-06 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
 
are saved throughout the school year but will be overwritten 
each year. The final cumulative GPA (accumulation over grades 9-
12) as of the current year is saved in Aspen and transferred to the 
Data Warehouse. 
HELPFUL LINKS 
Grade Point Average (GPA) Help Guides for Aspen 
Weighting Chart 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Teaching and Learning 
Department: 
Office of Teaching & Learning 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-6053 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-03 
Version 01 
 
TEXTBOOK MANAGEMENT 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
School Committee policy and state law recognize the student's 
right to use textbooks, on a loan basis, without charge. As a 
public school system, we have a responsibility to supply our 
students with the textbooks and other materials they need for 
school use. Accordingly, School Committee policy states that "no 
student should be required to furnish or pay for any books or 
other materials for school use, with the exception of materials 
used for certain practical arts projects that result in items that 
belong to the student after the project's completion." 
School Committee policy and state law also recognize the 
student's responsibility to use and not abuse or lose these same 
textbooks and materials. School Committee policy states that 
"students will be required to pay for textbooks and other school-
owned materials that they lose or damage" (ref. Student Fees, 
Fines and Charges - Policy File).  Under Massachusetts law, the 
sums recovered from pupils in the public schools for loss of 
schoolbooks … may be used by the School Committee for the 
replacement of such books or materials ... (M.G.L. c.44, §53). 
As school leaders and teachers, we are concerned that resources 
be maximized and not misused.  Instructional material costs are 
significant. It is important that school leaders, teachers, students, 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 2 of 12 
 
and parents understand and adhere to our policies and 
procedures for the care of textbooks and other instructional 
materials. The following guidelines, based on long-standing 
School Committee policy, have been established and should be 
followed for the lending of books to pupils. 
PREPARATION, STORAGE, AND CONTROL OF TEXTBOOKS 
● All textbooks and library books shall be numbered and an 
inventory maintained by the school leader.  School 
Committee policy requires that "Heads of school/principals 
will be responsible for and will keep complete records of all 
books... and other instructional materials furnished to their 
schools."  The inventory should include: 
○ Title of book 
○ Author 
○ Publisher and year of publication 
○ Date of purchase (for all books purchased for SY21 and 
beyond) 
○ Class subject for which it is used (textbooks) 
○ Name of teachers to whom the textbooks are issued 
(textbooks) 
● All textbooks should be stamped with the school name on 
the inside of the front cover. Each textbook should be 
numbered and recorded on the inside of the front cover. 
● All textbooks shall be stored in secure rooms, lockers, or 
cabinets.  Principals/heads of school or their designees shall 
ensure that a record is maintained of every textbook that is 
removed from storage. 
● Principals/heads of school shall ensure that teachers 
maintain an inventory of textbooks that includes the 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 3 of 12 
 
condition of the text and who it is assigned to for each 
quarter, trimester, semester, or year. 
● Principals/heads of school should work with teachers, 
students, and parents to raise their awareness of the 
importance of caring for and replacing textbooks. The Guide 
to the Boston Public Schools for Families and Students 
references this information. School-based rules should 
outline the rules and responsibilities for using textbooks and 
the penalties for violations.  
TEACHER’S RESPONSIBILITY 
● Teachers should maintain a record of the title, the textbook 
number, and the name of the pupil to whom each textbook 
is lent and should check periodically that students have the 
textbook assigned. Librarians must establish and maintain 
an appropriate inventory control system and loan procedure 
for all library books, materials and equipment assigned to 
the school library. 
● Teachers should encourage students in the proper care, 
including covering, of loaned textbooks. 
STUDENT’S RESPONSIBILITY 
● The book is to be returned to the principal of the school or 
to the teacher authorized to receive it at any time required 
by them and in as good condition as when received, 
allowance being made for the wear and damage caused by 
careful use. 
● If lost or damaged by carelessness or accident beyond what 
may be reasonably allowed, the book is to be replaced by 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 4 of 12 
 
the pupil to whom it is loaned and as required by the School 
Committee. 
● Written notice of any previous defacement is required when 
the book is received. 
● Damage by marking, tearing, etc. is not allowed. 
● Students who transfer within the Boston Public Schools or 
who leave the school system shall return all textbooks and 
library books to the schools that loaned the books. 
Principals/heads of school should notify appropriate staff 
(e.g., registrars, guidance counselors) to make a note on the 
appropriate sign-out forms of any student leaving school 
who has not paid the replacement costs of lost or damaged 
books. High school seniors should not be allowed to sign out 
on the last day for seniors (i.e., day 170) without returning or 
making restitution for a lost or damaged book.  A copy of 
any open account form should be retained in the temporary 
record of any student who does not pay the replacement 
cost of a damaged or lost book. 
● Students who transfer within the Boston Public Schools 
should not be loaned textbooks or library books in their 
receiving schools until they have returned or arranged to 
replace all their books from their sending school. 
PARENT RESPONSIBILITY 
● Parents should be informed of textbook loan and/or library 
book loan conditions at the beginning of the school year.  
Notification should be made in the form of a letter to 
parents in the language of the home and in any newsletters 
sent home to parents at the start of the school year.   


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 5 of 12 
 
● Parents of students who lose or damage textbooks and/or 
library books should be informed by the principal/head of 
school, in writing, within 30 days of learning of the 
loss/damage and the cost of replacement. 
REPLACEMENT OF TEXTBOOKS  
● If a student damages or loses a textbook and/or a library 
book and the student and parent refuses to make 
restitution, a replacement book must be made available for 
classroom or library use.  However, restrictions may be 
imposed (e.g., students may use text only during class but 
may not take the text out of the classroom). 
● If a student damages or loses a textbook or library book and 
the student and parent continue to refuse to make 
restitution by the start of the following school years, the 
student will be subject to penalties under school-based 
rules. 
● With respect to penalties for students who do not pay the 
replacement costs of lost or damaged books, 
principals/heads of school should involve the School Site 
Council in establishing school-based rules and 
corresponding penalties. These penalties might include but 
not be limited to prohibiting the student from attending 
certain school activities not related to the instructional 
program.  Before any penalty is imposed, the principal/head 
of school must provide advance written notice to the 
student and their parents/guardians. The written notice 
must provide the student and their parents/guardians with 
an opportunity to remedy the situation prior to actual 
imposition of the penalty.  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 6 of 12 
 
● An appeals process should be provided to address issues 
such as claims of “hardship” or improper assessment of 
damages (e.g., the loss or damage of a book which is not the 
result of the student’s negligence, parent has proof that 
payment was made, etc.). All appeals should be heard by the 
principal/head of school, who should issue a written 
decision, a copy of which should be forwarded to the parent 
and a copy of which should be filed in the student’s 
temporary record.  In addition, flexibility in the method of 
payment should be offered (e.g., school service projects 
being performed by the student in lieu of dollar payment is 
one possibility). 
● All funds collected for lost or damaged textbooks and/or 
library books should be forwarded by principals/heads of 
school to the business manager for deposit in a revolving 
account for the purchase of replacement textbooks.  The 
business manager will allocate the revolving account book 
funds, giving priority to the schools that collected money for 
lost/damaged books. 
TEXTBOOK INVENTORY AND REPLACEMENT PLANS 
● Before budget collaborative, principals/heads of school shall 
estimate their textbook needs for the following school year, 
based on textbooks checks and on projected student 
enrollment and shall develop a textbook replacement plan. 
Instructional Leadership Teams and School Site Councils 
should be involved in the development of the replacement 
plan. Replacement books should be ordered by individual 
schools. Texts that are part of curriculum adoption of BPS-
recommended curricula or those that will be used in new 
classrooms will be purchased by central office.  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 7 of 12 
 
● In June, at the end of the school year, principals/heads of 
school shall conduct a thorough inventory of textbooks.  
● Principals/heads of school shall maintain a record of every 
student who does not arrange to replace textbooks that are 
lost or damaged. The record should include the book receipt 
signed by the student when the book was loaned. 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
By the end of the 2nd 
week of school 
Principals/heads of school send letters 
to families regarding district textbook 
policy. 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 8 of 12 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Teaching and Learning 
Department: 
Office of Teaching & Learning 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9000 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 9 of 12 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
 
Dear Parent/Guardian: 
As the new school year begins and we loan textbooks and other 
resource materials to our students, I would like to ask for the help 
of all parents.  We need your help if we are to reduce the number 
of lost and damaged books.  Textbooks are very expensive today, 
many costing as much as $60.00 each.  We have worked hard 
over the past two years to update and replace our books. As a 
result, most of our textbooks are less than five years old and are 
in good condition. 
Some subjects or courses may not use a textbook; instead, they 
use reference books, original source documents, and/or library 
research materials.  
Please work with your child and with us to keep our books in 
good condition.  I ask that you remind your child of the following: 
● All textbooks and library books are the property of the 
Boston Public Schools and are loaned for the use of 
students while they are enrolled. 
● All textbooks and library books used for classroom work and 
homework should be respected and returned in good 
condition. 
● Students/parents are accountable for books and must pay 
for the replacement of lost or damaged books. 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 10 of 12 
 
● All textbooks that are taken home by students should be 
covered. 
All materials used to support classroom instruction, all textbooks, 
library books and resource materials should be cared for so that 
they can be used by other students in the future. I appreciate 
your assistance and cooperation in this effort and thank you for 
your help. 
Our best wishes to you and your child for a successful school 
year. 
Sincerely yours, 
 
 
 
Principal/Head of School 
 
 
School 
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 11 of 12 
 
File: EDB-R 
 
MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL OF MATERIALS AND 
EQUIPMENT 
Heads of school/principals will be responsible for and will keep 
complete records of all books, globes, maps, charts, apparatus 
and computers, and other state-of-the-art instructional materials 
furnished to their schools. 
 
Approved prior to 1988. 
Policy Manual, School Committee of the City of Boston 
 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 12 of 12 
 
 
FORM 134 
Boston Public Schools 
PUPIL'S BOOK RECEIPT 
Date: 
 
Subject: 
 
Teacher: 
 
Received: 
 
Number:  
 
I promise to return in good order or replace with a new one. 
Room:  _____________ 
Pupil's Signature: 
 
Form 134    9/98 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER:  
FAM-03 
Version 01 
 
MIDDLE AND HIGH SCHOOL STUDENT GOVERNMENT 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
“As we continue to work at improving the quality of education 
for all students, it is important that the voice of students be 
heard at the local, state and national levels.”  
Massachusetts Dept. of Elementary and Secondary Education  
  
Every Boston public middle and high school (including district 
schools, exam schools, and all alternative, pilot, and in-district 
charter schools) must have a written student engagement policy 
documenting opportunities for students to assume leadership 
roles within classrooms and the broader school community, in 
alignment with the 2016 BPS Opportunity and Achievement Gaps 
Policy. As part of this policy, each high school must also have a 
functioning and engaged student government. Middle schools 
are encouraged to have a student government. Student leaders 
in this body will represent their peers by serving as advisors, 
researchers, and participants in the decision-making process at 
the school and district level. Student government serves to 
engage students in learning about democracy and leadership.  
Student government bodies are essential to ensuring equity in all 
aspects of schooling. With faculty and administrative support, 
student government members should:  
● Ensure student voices are heard and incorporated in school 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-03 
Page 2 of 7 
 
decision making through the School Site Council, 
(SSC)/Governing Board, and meetings with the 
administration.  
● Develop and grow a body of student leaders by working 
closely with the faculty advisor(s) and the head of school. 
● Organize the student body and advocate for policies, 
practices, and opportunities that will close opportunity gaps 
at the school and district level. 
Through student government and SSC, students can assist in 
fulfilling the school’s mission and design and improve the culture 
and climate of the school.  
STUDENT GOVERNMENT COMPOSITION 
Schools will strive to form a student government that reflects the 
diversity of the student population in terms of race/ethnicity, 
gender, grade level, educational program (e.g., general, special, 
and bilingual education), and other factors. The number of 
participants should depend on the size of the school and what is 
manageable for the advisor. The recommendation is to have 10-15 
students serve in student government.  
It is recommended that student government members be 
connected to other school-based groups such as the School-
Based Wellness Council and student clubs. These positions can 
be dual roles with other positions on Student Government or can 
be stand alone. The faculty advisor should help students think 
about their time and commitments and what it would mean to 
take on dual roles in the student government.  
ROLE OF THE FACULTY ADVISOR 
The principal/head of school, with student input, should appoint 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-03 
Page 3 of 7 
 
one or more faculty advisors to support and oversee each student 
government. The principal/head of school will include students in 
the selection process. Student governments can be considered 
school clubs, and as such principals/heads of school are strongly 
encouraged to pay a stipend to the faculty advisor(s). 
The faculty advisor(s) will:  
● Facilitate youth leadership in all aspects of student 
governance. 
● Meet with the student government at least twice per month 
and provide support in organizing quarterly meetings each 
school year. 
● Assist student government leaders in the development of 
action plans for the school and obtain the appropriate 
approvals before a plan is implemented.  
● Assist student government leaders in planning and 
managing their events/activities, supporting with logistics 
and approval.  
● Act as a liaison between the student government, School Site 
Council/Governing Board, and the Instructional Leadership 
Team (ILT). 
● Ensure the tracking of data and support members as they 
complete reporting on activities.  
● Provide the principal/head of school with regular updates on 
how the action plans are being carried out.  
● Advise student government leaders on their leadership and 
scholar-activism. 
● Monitor and record all student work and approvals for 
proposals and dates.  
● Develop student leaders by providing or facilitating training 
and support as necessary. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-03 
Page 4 of 7 
 
ALIGNMENT WITH PRINCIPAL/HEAD OF SCHOOL EVALUATION 
Please refer to the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and 
Secondary Education Educator Evaluation: Appendix B: School-
Level Administrator Rubric. 
● Indicator III-A1. Family Engagement. 
o Engages SG in activities, events, and opportunities to 
create a welcoming environment. 
o Students contribute to the design by sharing their 
knowledge of family and culture. 
o Students evaluate and problem solve with staff and 
leadership challenges/barriers to including families in the 
school community. 
● Indicator IV-B1. Policies and Practices. 
o Students participate in an activity identifying the makeup 
of the school. 
o Cultural Sharing day. 
o Students participate in SSC and/or other groups that 
develop culturally sensitive policies. 
● Indicator IV-E-1. Shared Vision Development. 
o Students are part of the visioning process through focus 
groups, surveys, community meetings, etc. 
o Students share in the developing messaging for the 
student body. 
● Indicator IV-F-3. Consensus Building.  
o Conflict resolution. 
o Restorative justice practices. 
o Student involvement in SSC and decision-making body. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-03 
Page 5 of 7 
 
ELECTIONS 
It is the responsibility of every principal/head of school to ensure 
that elections are held and the student government is 
established no later than October 15. The recommendation is that 
all student elections be held as one process by April 15 of the 
current school year to roll out the following school year. See the 
Student Elections Toolkit for guidance on facilitating student 
elections and all the necessary reporting forms. 
REPORTING 
Once the student government is established, each school must 
send the student government roster to the Office of Youth 
Leadership, which must include: 
1. Student information for all elected positions.  
2. Student information for the two (2) students who are 
elected to serve on SSC or Governing Board (these 
students shall also serve on the Personnel 
Subcommittee). 
3. Student information for the BSAC representative (see 
Superintendent Circular FAM-06). 
4. Student information for the Greater Boston Regional 
Student Advisory Council (GBRSAC) representatives. 
Please note the Department of Elementary and 
Secondary Education requires secondary schools to host 
their student elections for GBRSAC representatives and 
those names be submitted no later than mid-April for the 
representatives serving the following school year.  
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-03 
Page 6 of 7 
 
MIDDLE SCHOOL LEVEL OVERVIEW 
Middle school student governments serve the same functions as 
high school student governments. During middle school, 
students are building their self-advocacy skills to develop their 
voices, identities, and agency in the school community. Learning 
about leadership is a key activity for many middle school student 
governments. Student government members learn how to 
research, plan, organize, and execute programs and activities for 
many students. The student government advisor leads student 
government members in developing their leadership skills.  
Practicing Democracy: Governing democratically is a skill 
students learn during student government. Student government 
gives students hands-on experience in the workings of a 
democracy and teaches them how to work cooperatively with 
others. Meetings should be run to promote students' working 
together for the common good and learning how to put 
leadership into action. 
Planning and Implementing School Spirit Activities: Building 
school spirit and culture that is linguistically sustaining and 
affirming can be one of the projects of the student government. 
Through school events such as talent shows, fundraisers, and 
assemblies, students, teachers, faculty members and parents 
come together to help plan these activities throughout the 
school year and appoint various people to run these functions.  
Addressing Cares, Concerns, and Restorative Justice: Students 
will raise school concerns that can best be addressed in student 
government. Whether it is more nutritious foods served in the 
cafeteria or issues regarding school spirit days, student 
government meetings give students a forum for sharing their 
grievances and analyzing possible solutions to these problems. 
With the support of the Office of Restorative Justice, students 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-03 
Page 7 of 7 
 
can be trained as circle keepers and can implement restorative 
justice to build community, repair harm, and promote collective 
healing. 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
October 15 
Deadline for student government elections to be 
held  
October 15 
Deadline for reporting the student government 
roster, including all student and faculty 
information listed above, to the Office of Youth 
Leadership at BSAC@bostonpublicschools.org 
October 31 
Deadline for the first student government meeting 
to be held 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Director of Opportunity Youth 
Department: 
Department of Opportunity Youth 
Mailing Address: 443 Warren Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-9620 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FAM-01 
Version 01 
 
 
 
SCHOOL PARENT COUNCILS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Boston Public Schools values the voices of families and seeks to 
engage families in both school governance and in an advisory 
capacity at all levels throughout the district. School Parent 
Councils (SPCs) serve as advocates and advisors to 
principals/heads of school, school superintendents, the 
superintendent, and the School Committee.  
SPCs provide an opportunity for families to be more deeply 
engaged at the school level, partnering with the principal/head of 
school to improve school culture and outcomes for all students. 
In addition to the school-based SPC, there are districtwide parent 
advisory councils that bring together parents across schools to 
serve as advisors to district leadership. The Citywide Parent 
Council (CPC) serves as the districtwide voice for parents and is 
composed of representatives from each school. The Special 
Education Parent Advisory Council (SPED PAC) represents the 
families of students with disabilities who receive special 
education services. The District English Learner Advisory 
Committee (DELAC) works to ensure that parents are informed 
about all aspects of BPS that affect English learners and provide 
recommendations to the Office of English Learners. These groups 
serve to empower parents and partner with BPS to improve 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
outcomes for all students. This circular focuses on the role and 
function of the SPC. 
SCHOOL PARENT COUNCILS 
The SPC is the independently established "voice" of all parents in 
the school community. The SPC advocates for students and the 
school, meets frequently and consistently, elects representatives 
to sit on the School Site Council (SSC), and promotes an 
environment of understanding and common purpose among 
parents, students, and school staff, with a focus on student 
learning and school improvement. For the purposes of this 
circular, the term “parent” includes a legal guardian or other 
person standing in loco parentis (such as a grandparent or 
stepparent with whom the child lives, or a person who is legally 
responsible for the child's welfare)." Sect. 9101(31) ESEA. 
The roles and responsibilities of the SPC are as follows: 
Roles: 
• Collaborate with school staff to create a welcoming school 
climate for all students and families. 
• Coordinate school-wide activities and events that engage 
families in student learning.  
• Raise funds to support school-based initiatives, activities, 
and events. 
Responsibilities: 
• Provide a safe forum for families to express concerns. 
• Contribute to school-based initiatives related to school 
improvement, school climate, and student learning. 
 
All parents or legal guardians of a child attending a particular 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
school are automatically members of that school’s SPC.  
The SPC Executive Committee is the elected leadership of the 
SPC. Schools must adhere to the following guidelines for the 
election of the Executive Committee: 
• OFCA recommends that the school’s Family Liaison is either 
the facilitator, co-facilitator, or observer of the election. 
• Elections for SSC and SPC parent reps must happen in the 
fall of the new school year. Spring elections will no longer be 
accepted. This is to help make opportunities for 
engagement in the councils more equitable.  
• Elections for the 2024-2025 school year may be conducted 
in person, virtually, or through a hybrid system, providing for 
equitable access to voting. 
• Parents/legal guardians who wish to become members of 
the Executive Committee must have a child enrolled at the 
school in which they are running.  
• Co-chairs and officers should be representative of the school 
community. 
• Any parent/legal guardian who is present at an SPC election 
(held in person or virtually) may be nominated for the SPC 
Executive Committee (a parent may nominate themself). 
• Within one school, elected members can serve more than 
one role only if there is an insufficient number of candidates 
to fill all roles. 
• Parents/legal guardians who are not present (in-person or 
virtually) at the time of the election may not be nominated. 
• Parents/legal guardians who work at their child’s school 
may not be elected to the SPC Executive Committee, except 
for extenuating circumstances. 
• Each family is allowed one vote per family. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
• Each candidate should be allowed one minute to introduce 
themself. 
• Elections may be carried out by secret ballot or can be 
approved by a majority vote of the present group. 
• Nominations and elections are held during the same 
meeting; therefore, voters must be present, virtually or in 
person, to participate in the election.  
 
SPC EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 
The role of the SPC Executive Committee is to: 
• Provide leadership and to organize the work of the SPC . 
• Maintain ongoing communication with all parents to ensure 
that they are connected to what is happening at school. 
• Maintain ongoing communication and a collaborative 
working relationship with the principal/head of school, 
teachers, school staff, and community partners. 
• Create an inclusive environment on the SPC and in the 
whole school community that welcomes the active 
participation of all parents. 
• Set a schedule and format of meetings that invites 
maximum participation of families. 
 
The composition of the SPC Executive Committee should:  
• Reflect the racial and ethnic diversity of the student body. 
• Include parents of students who are English Learners  
• Include parents of students who receive special education 
services. 
• Include parents of students in a range of grade levels.  
• Include a mix of newly elected and experienced parent 
leaders.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
 
Parents may serve in more than one SPC Executive Committee 
role simultaneously at the same school if no other candidates 
come forward. However, SPCs are encouraged to elect as many 
parents as possible for the various roles for the purposes of 
sharing responsibility and building leadership capacity. The SPC 
Executive Committee consists of the following roles: 
Co-Chair  
• Number elected: 2  
• Schedule and facilitate SPC meetings 
• Create agendas  
• Maintain ongoing two-way communication with 
principal/head of school 
Treasurer 
• Number elected: 1-2  
• Maintain clear and accurate financial records for the SPC  
• Provide monthly expense reports 
• Lead or manage SPC fundraising efforts  
Secretary 
• Number elected: 1-2  
• Conduct outreach to the parent community  
• Record and share meeting notes with the school 
community 
 
School Site Council Reps  
• Number elected: 5-8 (based on the number of staff in the 
BTU bargaining unit) 
• Represent the parent community as a member of the SPC 
• Participate in school-based decision-making 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
• Attend SPC meetings to report out on SSC business and 
receive information to bring back to the SSC 
• Facilitate communication between the SPC and SSC 
 
Citywide Parent Council Rep 
• Number elected: 1-2* 
 
• Participate in a districtwide parent group designed to 
advocate for BPS families and students and influence BPS 
policy 
Special Education Parent Advisory Council Rep 
• Number elected: 1-2* 
• Participate in a citywide parent organization designed to 
provide information and resources to families of students 
with disabilities who receive special education services  
District English Learners Advisory Committee 
 
• Number elected: 1-2* 
• Participate in a citywide committee tasked with providing 
recommendations to school and district officials regarding 
programs and services provided to EL students 
Total # of Parents Elected to SPC Executive Committee: 12-20 
 
*If vacant, this position should be revisited throughout the school 
year, and families should be reminded of the opportunity and 
the benefit of representation on these citywide councils.  
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SCHOOL PARENT COUNCIL AND 
SCHOOL SITE COUNCIL 
The School Parent Council (SPC) elects parent members to 
represent the parent voice on the School Site Council (SSC). SSC 
representatives are members of the SPC Executive Committee 
and should attend SPC meetings to provide regular updates on 
SSC proceedings to ensure opportunities for parent input and 
feedback. All SSC meetings are open to the public; therefore, any 
parent, staff person, or community member can attend. However, 
only the elected representatives can vote on SSC decisions. 
SCHOOL PARENT COUNCIL BY-LAWS 
All SPCs must develop by-laws for their council to provide 
structure and guidance for SPC operations. SPCs must annually 
review and approve their by-laws at their first meeting following 
the election. The by-laws are a public document and should be 
made available to all parents and members of the school 
community, upon request. The SPC by-laws should be submitted 
to the Office of Family and Community Advancement (OFCA) 
upon approval by the SPC.  
SCHOOL PARENT COUNCIL MEETINGS 
The SPC should meet at least once monthly. The first meeting of 
the year should include a presentation from the principal/head of 
school on the school’s goals for the year and election of 
representatives to the Executive Committee and School Site 
Council (see Superintendent’s Circular FAM-02 for more details). 
The following meeting should focus on sharing the work that the 
SPC is doing and provide the opportunity for feedback from 
parents. SPCs are encouraged to meet monthly, in keeping with 
the SSC frequency, to ensure that the parent body is kept 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
abreast of SSC activity. Meeting frequency and purpose should 
be detailed in the SPC By-laws. 
SPC GUIDELINES FOR PRINCIPALS, HEADS OF SCHOOL, AND 
ADMINISTRATORS 
• The principal/head of school must work with the SPC to host 
an annual Title I meeting to share with families (1) how the 
school is investing its Title I allocation, (2) rights and 
responsibilities of Title I parents, and (3) to seek feedback 
and/or input from parents on the Home-School Compact 
and Family Engagement Plan. 
• The principal/head of school should meet with the SPC on a 
regular basis to provide updates on school policies, the 
instructional focus, school data, other pertinent information, 
and to address school-wide parent concerns. 
• The principal/head of school should provide families with 
periodic updates on overall student/school progress, sharing 
data at SPC meetings.  
• The principal/head of school should meet with the SPC co-
chairs for ongoing communication regarding family and 
student engagement practices, student learning, and school 
improvement.  
• The principal/head of school should work with the SPC co-
chairs to have information translated into the home 
languages represented at their school and ensure that 
arrangements for translation and interpretation have been 
negotiated and agreed upon by the SPC and school staff 
(this includes election night). 
• The principal/head of school or designee should assist the 
SPC in notifying families of all SPC and/or Executive 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
Committee meetings, by providing access to a computer, 
paper, copying machine, and postage; and by working with 
the SPC for timely dissemination of notices for the entire 
community using a range of communication methods, 
including School Messenger, email, the school’s website, 
and school media.  
The SPC works collaboratively with the principal/head of school 
and school staff to solve problems and develop plans to improve 
the engagement of families and students. The commitment to 
partnering with families reflects the value that BPS has placed on 
the engagement of families and is grounded in decades of family 
engagement research. 
ALIGNMENT WITH PRINCIPAL/HEAD OF SCHOOL EVALUATION 
Effective implementation and the authentic engagement of 
parent, teacher, and student voice align with the following 
standards of the Massachusetts Administrator Evaluation rubric: 
• Indicator III-A1. Family Engagement 
o Engages parents, students, and teachers in creating a 
welcoming school environment and fostering a shared 
responsibility engagement. 
• Indicator IV-B1. Policies and Practices  
o Creates opportunities for authentic parent, student, 
and teacher voice in school-based decision-making.  
• Indicator IV-E-1. Shared Vision Development 
o Parents, students, and teachers have an opportunity to 
shape the vision for the school as it pertains to 
instruction and school climate. 
• Indicator IV-F-3. Consensus Building  


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
o Decisions are made using a consensus model, in which 
all members of the SSC (including SPC members) have 
an equal voice. 
o Resolves conflicts among members of the school 
community. 
IMPORTANT DATES  
Date 
Activity 
September 15 
Election dates submitted to OFCA 
October 31 
Deadline for completing SPC elections of all 
parent reps, including SSC representatives; and 
submitting rosters to OFCA. 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Family School Engagement 
Practices 
Department: 
Office of Family and Community 
Advancement 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-7750 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
FAM-08 
Version 01 
 
 
 
• TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION SERVICES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
to a subsequent version.  
 
HISTORICAL CONTEXT 
The “Parent Communications” section of the Successor 
Settlement Agreement between the Boston Public Schools (BPS) 
and the Department of Justice (DOJ) outlines the services that 
must be provided to ensure meaningful language access for our 
BPS families. The Office of Language Access, formerly the 
Translation and Interpretation Unit (T&I), was established to 
implement and coordinate interpretation and translation services 
throughout BPS to centralize and standardize language access 
across the district. The Office of Language Access strives to 
provide meaningful language access to limited and non-English 
proficient constituents via qualified, trained, and professional 
interpreters and translators.  
REQUEST PARAMETERS 
The Office of Language Access handles translation and 
interpretation services for essential information. The following list 
provides examples of essential information requiring translation 
and interpretation: 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-08 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
 
 
• IEP/504 meetings 
• Report cards for students 
• Academic progress reports for students 
• Enrollment/registration documents 
• Disciplinary process information 
• Permission slips/forms for district and school activities and 
programs 
• Applications for activities requiring parental consent 
• Parent-teacher conferences 
• Open houses 
• Parent handbooks 
• Public health and safety information 
• Documents on academic planning/options 
• Screening procedures needing students’/parents’ language 
backgrounds, the process for refusing all/some ELL services  
• Written information on parents’/students’ rights and 
responsibilities 
• Written information on services and benefits available to 
parents and students  
With every request, the Office of Language Access will determine 
whether the services sought are the most appropriate to fulfill 
the specific language access need and may tailor the request 
accordingly. Fulfilling requests for translation and interpretation 
of non-essential information is at the discretion of the Office of 
Language Access and is contingent on availability.  
 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-08 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
 
SERVICES PROVIDED BY QUALIFIED AND BILINGUAL STAFF  
The district is charged with providing qualified and trained 
translators and interpreters to ensure families have meaningful 
access to information. As such, the Office of Language Access 
discourages the use of non-approved professionals with 
bi/multilingual skills, save for in exceptional circumstances. In 
addition, the use of computers/machines to translate is strongly 
discouraged.  
REQUESTING TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION SERVICES 
All services are requested and managed through the district's 
online translation and interpretation request platform. Please be 
aware that the Office of Language Access can only support 
Boston Public Schools' requests placed through the Office of 
Language Access online platform to comply with the City of 
Boston's procurement regulations and processes. To that end, 
any language access work performed outside of the district's 
established translation and interpretation protocol will be at the 
requester's expense. 
Schools should designate one primary and one alternate point of 
contact for submitting their translation and interpretation 
requests. In addition, the point of contact (1) is responsible for 
answering logistic questions about events, (2) will serve as the 
contact for interpreters, (3) will provide informational materials 
for interpreters before scheduled events, and (4) will clarify 
written content and receive the written translations. Lastly, this 
person must also promptly fill out the post-service survey. 
For district staff, designated central office employees may 
request translation and interpretation services. Similarly, the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-08 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
 
central office requester serves as the point of contact for that 
service. This could entail (1) answering logistics questions about 
events, (2) contacting on-site/virtual interpreters, (3) providing 
informational materials for interpreters prior to the event, (4) 
clarifying written content/materials, and (5) receiving the written 
translations. This person must also promptly fill out the post-
service survey. 
FULFILLING REQUESTS FOR TRANSLATIONS AND 
INTERPRETATIONS  
For translations, requesters should allow a minimum of 2 weeks, 
bearing in mind that larger jobs will, correspondingly, take longer 
to complete. As rush/short notice jobs do occur, please specify on 
the request form if the translation needs expediting. Expediting 
is at the discretion of the Office of Language Access.  
For in-person interpretations, the more advance notice given, the 
easier it is to secure interpreter services. Please submit a request 
a minimum of 2 weeks before the service date. For American Sign 
Language (ASL), a minimum of 3 weeks is recommended to 
secure services. As rush/short notice jobs do occur, please specify 
on the request form if the service needs to be expedited. 
Interpreter assignment is based on availability and not 
guaranteed.  
Emergent requests outside of the Superintendent’s and 
Communications offices that need to be expedited will be 
completed in a timeframe at the discretion of the Office of 
Language Access. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-08 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
 
CANCELLATIONS OF SERVICES 
The Office of Language Access must be notified immediately of 
any appointment cancellation in which an interpreter (i.e., oral, 
ASL) has been scheduled. A 48-hour notice of cancellation is 
required for ASL. For oral interpreter services, we require a 24-
hour notice of notice of cancellation. Please be aware that if you 
fail to cancel within the designated timeframes, the district will 
be charged for the services you requested. This can lead to 
inefficient utilization of our limited funds and resources, which 
we strive to avoid. To cancel interpreter services, please submit 
via interpretations@bostonpublicschools.org. If you are canceling 
translation requests, please do so as early as possible via 
translations@bostonpublicschools.org. 
TELEPHONIC INTERPRETATION SERVICES 
Schools have the option to utilize the on-demand LionBridge 
Telephonic Interpretation service that is available 24 hours a day, 
7 days a week, 365 days a year, in more than 350 languages. 
Telephonic interpretation is the oral transmission of a message 
from one language to another via telephone. It is typically 
conducted in consecutive mode, meaning the interpreter will 
translate the message after the speaker has stopped speaking. 
This service should be used for instances when parent 
communication is not pre-scheduled, e.g., a parent stops by a 
school, a school must contact the parent of a sick/injured 
student, etc. When essential information is discussed, please 
ensure that an interpreter or translation of relevant documents is 
requested in advance.  
The Office of Language Access will monitor calls and usage to 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-08 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
 
ensure adherence to district protocols. Schools and/or central 
office departments will be notified of usage restrictions due to 
non-adherence, which will be at the discretion of the Office of 
Language Access. 
TALKING POINTS 
Schools have access to TalkingPoints, which is a two-way 
multilingual family engagement platform allowing educators and 
administrators the opportunity to communicate with families in 
their native language (including English speakers) via the web, 
mobile, or text messages. 
• TalkingPoints equips educators and administrators with a 
platform for collaborative communication and analytics 
around family engagement and student progress to 
increase student potential for long-term success.  
• The service is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 
days a year, in more than 100 languages.1  
• It removes the need for educators to provide parents with 
their personal cell phone numbers. 
ASSISTANCE  
For further information, including but not limited to detailed 
 
1 At present, the platform doesn't support Caboverdiano; 
however, a simplified version is currently being piloted at the 
Orchard Gardens Elementary School. The simplified version 
supports outgoing one-way messaging/announcements to 
families only. Additional functionality will be considered based on 
pilot results. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-08 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
 
translation and interpretation policy and procedures, tutorials 
(i.e., How to Submit a Request, Request Platform User Guide, 
School-Based Administrator Training Webinar), and school and 
parent resources/materials to support your school-specific 
language access efforts, please refer to the Office of Language 
Access website at 
https://www.bostonpublicschools.org/translation-interpretation. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Language Access Services 
Department: 
Family and Community Advancement 
(Office of Language Access) 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-7967  
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FAM-07 
Version 01 
 
 
HOME-SCHOOL COMPACT 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
OVERVIEW  
The Home-School Compact is a document that clarifies what 
school staff and families, working in collaboration, can do to help 
children reach high specific academic goals in core content 
areas. At their best, compacts link family engagement to school-
wide and grade level instructional goals and help ground the 
relationships between teachers and families in student learning.  
Additionally, the compact serves as a clear reminder of the 
shared responsibility of the school and home to ensure that 
children can learn what is required of them. It is a written 
commitment indicating how all members of a school community 
— families, teachers, principals, students, and concerned 
community members — agree to share responsibility for student 
learning. 
All schools receiving Title I funds are required to develop a 
home-school compact annually. 
WHAT IS INCLUDED IN A HOME-SCHOOL COMPACT? 
The compact should clearly communicate the following: 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-07 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 
1. Schoolwide instructional goals in core content areas and 
culturally and linguistically sustaining practices 
2. Specific learning goals for each grade level 
3. Key instructional strategies that the school plans to employ 
4. Specific strategies for families to support student learning at 
home 
5. How stakeholders, especially families, are involved in 
developing and revising the compact. 
Additionally, the compact provides a vehicle for clearly defining 
the expectations and shared responsibility for educating 
students. 
The compact must describe how the school and teacher agree to 
be responsible for:  
● Providing high-quality instruction for all students 
● Creating a supportive learning environment 
● Describing how school/teacher will build student agency in 
their learning 
● Showing respect for students and their families 
● Communicating with families and students about student 
progress. 
The compact must describe how families agree to be responsible 
for:  
● Supporting their children’s learning in school and out of 
school 
● Seeing that their children attend school regularly and on 
time 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-07 
Page 3 of 6 
 
 
● Participating in decisions relating to the education of their 
child and the school 
● Communicating with teachers on a regular basis. 
The compact must describe specific ways students agree to be 
responsible learners with the support of their parent(s) and 
teacher(s) by: 
● Attending school regularly and on time 
● Showing respect for themselves, their school, and other 
people 
● Believing they can and will learn 
● Trying to do their best in their work. 
The compact must emphasize the importance of ongoing, two-
way communication between home and school through the 
following minimum requirements:  
● Annual parent-teacher conference(s) to discuss the 
relationship between the compact agreements and the 
student’s achievement  
● Frequent, timely progress reports to families  
● Reasonable access to school staff in a variety of ways  
● Opportunities to participate in and observe class activities. 
DEVELOPING AND REVIEWING THE HOME-SCHOOL COMPACT  
The following are key considerations for developing your home-
school compact: 
1. The compact must be developed by a committee consisting 
of administrators, school staff, families, students, and 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-07 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 
teachers. Existing school-based family engagement action 
teams or a subcommittee of the School Site Council are 
options for the development of this document.  
2. The process for developing a compact should be open and 
inclusive, soliciting the input and contributions of a wide 
range of stakeholders. 
3. The compact provides an opportunity for each stakeholder 
to articulate their expectations regarding the delivery of 
teaching and learning and what they agree to be held 
accountable for regarding student achievement. 
4. The compact should be written in clear, family-friendly 
language, and translated into the languages spoken at the 
school.  
5. The compact should be written using the Racial Equity 
Planning Tool. 
6. Once a draft of the compact has been developed, families, 
teachers, and students should be given an opportunity to 
provide feedback and input. 
7. The final version of the document must be approved by the 
School Site Council annually in the spring in preparation for 
the upcoming school year. 
8. A final version of the compact must be submitted to the 
Office of Family and Community Advancement by  
October 31, 2024. 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-07 
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
USING THE HOME-SCHOOL COMPACT  
Schools must also develop a process for utilizing the compact to 
frame the relationships between teachers and families. Examples 
include: 
● The compact is reviewed at the beginning of parent-teacher 
conferences to frame the conversation about student 
progress and mutual accountability. 
● The compact is used throughout the year to frame 
conversations between teachers and families related to 
monitoring student progress toward specific learning goals. 
● The compact is used to frame school-based workshops 
designed to help families understand schoolwide and 
grade-level learning goals and how to support learning at 
home. 
ALIGNMENT WITH EDUCATOR EVALUATION 
The compact, if it is developed and used effectively and 
consistently, can be used as evidence of reaching the proficiency 
targets for the elements and indicators of Standard III in both the 
administrator and teacher evaluation rubrics.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION AND SUPPORT 
For additional information on home-school compacts, please see:  
● ESEA Title I, Part A, Section 1118(d)  
● www.ctsschoolparentcompact.org  
● Title I Toolkit 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-07 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 
The Office of Family and Community Advancement is responsible 
for supporting schools with the development and 
implementation of the compacts. 
IMPORTANT DATES  
Date 
Activity 
October 31 
Deadline for submitting current year Home-School 
Compact to Office of Family and Community 
Advancement 
May 31 
Deadline for School Site Council to review and 
approve the Home School Compact for the 
following school year 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Family School Engagement 
Practices  
Department: 
Office of Family and Community 
Advancement 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-7750 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent  


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FAM-05 
Version 01 
 
 
TITLE I FAMILY ENGAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
OVERVIEW 
Deepening partnerships with families is one of the key strategies 
for strengthening student learning and closing achievement 
gaps in the Boston Public Schools. Strong family and home-
school connection focused on student academic learning has 
consistently been shown to be associated with improved student 
achievement and school improvement. The shared responsibility 
that results from partnerships has the potential to improve 
relationships, strengthen schools, and ensure students are 
prepared to reach their educational potential in school and 
beyond. 
The BPS Five Core Elements of Engagement provide clear 
guidance for schools to develop and implement the Title I Family 
Engagement Requirements. Title I, Part A, Section 1118, of the 
Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) identifies 
specific family engagement practices required of all schools that 
receive Title I funds. The Office of Engagement provides oversight 
and support to ensure all schools that receive Title I funds meet 
the engagement requirements of Sec. 1118. 
 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-05 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
REQUIREMENTS OF SCHOOLS RECEIVING TITLE I FUNDS 
All schools receiving Title I Funds are required to do the following: 
1. Have a written Family Engagement Plan/Policy, developed 
in collaboration with parents and approved by the School 
Parent Council and School Site Council or Governing Board. 
2. Have a Home-School Compact, developed in collaboration 
with parents and approved by the School Parent Council 
and School Site Council or Governing Board. 
3. Set aside a minimum of 1% of Title I allocation in the school’s 
budget for family engagement. Decisions on how to allocate 
the 1% for family engagement must comply with federal 
guidelines and be made by the School Site Council or 
Governing Board. 
4. Host an annual parent meeting to discuss school priorities 
and programs under Title I by October 31.  
5. Build capacity of both families and teachers to effectively 
engage with one another to improve student learning 
outcomes. with an emphasis on the use of CRIOP, Pillar II. 
FAMILY ENGAGEMENT POLICY/PLAN 
The family engagement policy/plan is jointly designed by families 
and school stakeholders to describe how the school will carry out 
parent engagement to meet the changing needs of families, 
students, and the school. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-05 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
The Family Engagement Policy/Plan must:  
● Describe how parents will be engaged as equal partners in 
school-based decision-making, including tools they will use, 
such tools as School-based Equity Roundtables. 
● Describe how parents will be engaged in school 
improvement and student learning. 
● Identify strategies that the school will employ to build both 
parent and teacher capacity for partnering to support 
student learning. 
● Be shared with the school community in a format that is 
family friendly. 
● Be translated into families’ home languages. 
● Be updated annually to reflect the changing concerns of 
families’ and school priorities related to school climate and 
student learning. 
For additional information on the family engagement policy/plan, 
see ESEA Title I, Part A, Section 1118(b).  
HOME-SCHOOL COMPACT 
The purpose of the Home-School Compact is to establish shared 
responsibility for student academic achievement. 
For additional information on Home-School Compacts: 
● ESEA Title I, Part A, Section 1118(d)  
● BPS Circular FAM-7 Home-School Compacts 
● www.schoolparentcompact.org 
● Title I Toolkit 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-05 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
1% MINIMUM FAMILY ENGAGEMENT ALLOCATION 
All schools receiving Title I funds are required to set aside a 
minimum of 1% of the Title I allocation in the school's budget for 
family engagement. As needed, the Family School Engagement 
Practice team can provide guidance in allowable expenditures to 
schools. Decisions on how to allocate the 1% for family 
engagement should be made by the School Site Council or 
Governing Board in consultation with the parent body. 
For additional information on the use of Title I funds for family 
engagement, please see ESEA Title 1, Part A, Section1118(a)(3)(C) 
and Section 1118(e)(8), (9), and (10). 
ANNUAL MEETING 
Schools receiving Title I funds must convene an annual meeting 
with families in which: 
● All families are invited and encouraged to attend. 
● Families are informed of the school’s status as a Title I 
school. 
● The requirements of Title I are explained to families.  
● The school’s use and allocation of Title I funds is shared with 
families.  
● Families are informed of the different opportunities to be 
involved in school-based decision-making, school 
improvement, and supporting student learning. 
 
For additional information on the Annual Meeting as required 
under Title I, please see ESEA Title I, Part A, Section 1118(C)(1). 
CAPACITY BUILDING 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-05 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
Schools that receive Title I funds are required to provide capacity 
building opportunities for both families and educators designed 
to: 
● Help families understand learning standards, assessment of 
student learning, and how to effectively monitor student 
progress. 
● Strengthen families’ ability to support student learning at 
home. 
● Help principals/heads of school, teachers, and other school 
staff develop the mindsets, beliefs, skills, and strategies to 
effectively build relationships and maintain ongoing, two-
way, culturally appropriate communication with students’ 
families. 
● Collaborate with community-based organizations that work 
with school staff and/or parents to strengthen student 
learning outcomes. 
● Translate communications and provide interpretation from 
the school to families who speak a language other than 
English into the appropriate language. 
For additional information on the Title I requirements related to 
parent and teacher capacity building, please see ESEA, Title I, 
Part A, Section 1118(e). 
REPORTING  
To be considered in compliance with the family engagement 
requirements of Title I and the requirements of the BPS Core 
Elements of Engagement, schools must submit the following 
documents to the Office of Family and Community 
Advancement, or submit to their engagement folder: 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-05 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
● School-based Family Engagement Plan/Policy 
● Home-School Compact 
● Agenda, meeting minutes, election documents, meetings 
dates, roster, and bylaws of School Site Council 
● A self-assessment of the school’s engagement practices. 
 
The Office of Family and Community Advancement will be 
responsible for tracking parent participation in BPS Parent 
University, which builds the capacity of parents to effectively 
support student learning and advocate for student needs.  
ALIGNMENT WITH EDUCATOR EVALUATION 
The Title I Family Engagement requirements align with the 
educator evaluation Standard III: Family and Community 
Engagement addressing the continuum of supports that reflect 
shared expectations, responsibility, and opportunities for active 
participation and collaborative partnerships between schools, 
families, and community. Further, Title 1 requirements align with 
Culturally and Linguistically Sustaining Practices (CLSP), 
including the Culturally Responsive Instructional Observation 
Protocol (CRIOP). 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-05 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Family School Engagement 
Practices  
Department: 
Office of Family and Community 
Advancement 
Mailing Address: 
445 Warren Street, Roxbury, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-7750 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FAM-02 
Version 01 
 
 
   SCHOOL SITE COUNCILS  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Engaging families and students as equal partners has been 
identified as a core strategy for improving student performance 
in the Boston School Committee goals and the BPS Engagement 
Policy. Family and student engagement is also a significant 
component of the Massachusetts School-Level Administrator 
Rubric.  
This circular has been developed to help principals/heads of 
school effectively implement School Site Councils (SSC) as a 
foundational structure for engaging parents and students in 
school-based decision-making and school improvement. The 
Office of Family and Community Advancement (OFCA) 
collaborates with the Boston Teachers Union (BTU) to provide 
oversight and support for SSCs.  
For the purposes of this circular, the term “parent” includes a 
legal guardian or other person standing in loco parentis (such as 
a grandparent or stepparent with whom the child lives, or a 
person who is legally responsible for the child's welfare). Sect. 
9101(31) ESEA. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-02 
Page 2 of 14 
 
ROLE AND PURPOSE 
The role of the School Site Council is to engage parents and 
teachers to serve with the principal/head of school as the central 
decision-making body of the school. SSCs are required by the 
Massachusetts Education Reform Act of 1993 and by the 
collective bargaining agreement between the Boston Teachers 
Union (BTU) and the Boston School Committee.  
Under the school-based management/shared decision-making 
model described in the collective bargaining agreement 
between BPS and the BTU, the role of the SSC is to:  
● Review and approve the Quality School Plan within 
guidelines established by the superintendent.  
● Review and approve the recommendations of the 
Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) that have been 
endorsed by the principal/head of school and that will have 
a major effect on the school community. 
● Review and comment on the entire school budget, 
including the general funds and external funds budgets, in a 
timely fashion.  
● Approve the budget for discretionary school materials, 
supplies, textbooks, and equipment, including the use of 
school improvement award funds. 
● Review and approve recommendations from any other 
committee or group that is established to recommend 
changes that will have a major effect on the school 
community. 
● Develop and approve plans for increasing parent 
engagement in the school. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-02 
Page 3 of 14 
 
● Develop, review annually, and approve the School-Parent 
Compact as required by Title I. 
● Receive information about all outside programs or outside 
professionals that come into the school. 
● Approve waivers. 
As the central governing body at the school, the SSC oversees all 
school-based committees, including the ILT and the Personnel 
Subcommittee.  
The role of the ILT is to: 
● Serve as an advisory body to the principal/head of school on 
issues related to teaching and learning, assessment, and 
professional development. 
● Give a report each month to the SSC on ILT activities. 
● Seek and receive SSC approval for any ILT recommendation 
that alters the Quality School Plan or may have a major 
effect on the school community. 
Each school must elect a Personnel Subcommittee, whose 
composition must include two teachers, one parent, and the 
principal/head of school. The responsibilities of the Personnel 
Subcommittee are to: 
● Approve the hiring of new BTU teacher bargaining unit staff 
and in-transfer of BTU teachers’ bargaining unit staff from 
other schools in the system and the choice of teachers from 
the excess pools. 
● Approve the selection of lead teachers, mentor teachers, 
and new athletic coaches. 
● Determine the schedule and procedures for reviewing 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-02 
Page 4 of 14 
 
candidates for positions. 
Schools must submit the names of the members of the 
Personnel Subcommittee to the Office of Family and Community 
Advancement by October 31. For additional information on the 
Personnel Subcommittee, see Superintendent’s Circular FAM-04 
Personnel Subcommittee.   
SSC GOVERNANCE AND OPERATIONS 
The following provisions describe how effective SSCs should 
operate. 
1. SSC operations are governed by a BPS/BTU Joint Steering 
Committee, which includes parents and students. Any 
member of the SSC may file a complaint with the Steering 
Committee concerning the operation of the SSC at their 
school. 
2. The SSC is expected to operate as a single decision-making 
team, working together to reach consensus, as opposed to 
being individual representatives of specific constituent 
groups. 
3. Formally, decisions made by the SSC will be made by 
majority vote, with the principal/head of school voting with 
the majority.  
4. The principal/head of school is required to account in writing 
and in person (at a subsequent meeting) for any vote in 
contravention of a majority of the council. 
5. A quorum must be present to vote on issues. To constitute a 
quorum, the principal/head of school must be present as 
well as at least two teachers and two parents for SSCs with 9-
12 members and three teachers and three parents for SSCs 
with 13 or more members.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-02 
Page 5 of 14 
 
6. The principal/head of school shall serve as SSC co-chair and 
at the first meeting of the school year; the elected members 
of the SSC are encouraged to select one member (preferably 
a parent) to serve as the other co-chair.  
7. Other roles, such as note taker and any subcommittees, shall 
also be selected at the first SSC meeting of the school year. 
8. At the first SSC meeting of the year, a calendar of meetings 
for the entire school year shall be established, ensuring that 
the times and dates are convenient for all members. 
9. The agenda for the meetings shall be developed by the SSC 
co-chairs with input from other members of the SSC and the 
school community at large. 
10. Each SSC is required to pass by-laws to govern its operations. 
The by-laws must be approved or amended by two-thirds of 
the members of the bargaining unit in the school eligible to 
vote for the SSC and by two-thirds of the parents who come 
to a parent meeting. There must be at least two weeks’ 
notice for the parent meeting. 
11. All SSC meetings are subject to DESE regulations regarding 
specific law, including publicizing meeting dates in advance 
and sharing meeting minutes with the school community. 
12. On March 29, 2023, Governor Healey signed into law a 
supplemental budget bill which, among other things, 
extends the temporary provisions pertaining to the Open 
Meeting Law to March 31, 2025. These provisions allow for  
School Site Councils to meet remotely, provided that 
adequate access to the meetings is still available to the 
public.  Please see https://www.mass.gov/the-open-meeting-
law  for more information or current updates. Decisions 
about hosting in- person or virtual school-based meetings 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-02 
Page 6 of 14 
 
with families for SY 24-25 should be a shared decision with 
community members.  
For additional information on SSC governance and operations, 
please contact the Office of Family and Community 
Advancement or refer to the Shared Decision-Making section of 
the collective bargaining agreement between BPS and the BTU.  
COMPOSITION OF THE SSC  
The SSC shall be composed of:  
● The principal/head of school 
● Elected members of the BTU who work more than 50% of 
their work week at that school 
● Parents of children enrolled in that school elected by the 
School Parent Council 
● Two students (high school only) enrolled in that school 
elected by the Student Government.  
The specific number of parent and teacher representatives on 
the SSC is determined by the number of BTU members employed 
at the school. The number of parent representatives on the SSC 
must be equal to the number of BTU representatives, plus the 
principal/head of school. The table below demonstrates how the 
number of teacher and parent representatives are calculated. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-02 
Page 7 of 14 
 
School Site Council Representation* 
# of BTU members  
in school 
# of BTU SSC Reps # of Parent SSC Reps 
30 or fewer BTU 
4 
4 
31 – 60 BTU 
5 
5 
61 or more BTU 
6 
6 
 
*Plus, the principal/head of school and, as applicable, two 
students, as outlined above.  
Schools may also select associate (non-voting) SSC members 
from community-based organizations, higher education, or 
businesses that partner closely with the school. 
Each school shall also elect each year alternate parent, teacher, 
and student members of the SSC to substitute for absent 
members of their group. Alternate members who are elected by 
BTU bargaining unit members or parents to substitute for absent 
members may also fill vacancies created by the resignation or 
removal of SSC members. 
Parents elected as SSC representatives must reflect the racial and 
ethnic diversity of the student population at the school and 
include parents of students participating in a range of 
educational programs, such as special education and related 
services and programming for English Language Learners.  
For specific information on the election process of BTU 
representatives, please refer to the Shared Decision-Making 
section of the collective bargaining agreement between BPS and 
the BTU.  


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-02 
Page 8 of 14 
 
SSC ELECTION PROCEDURES FOR SELECTING PARENT AND 
STUDENT REPRESENTATIVES 
The following are key points for conducting successful elections. 
● Principals/heads of school should designate an impartial 
staff person as the school’s Election Facilitator. Elections 
should not be facilitated by the principal/head of school or 
by a parent currently serving on the SPC Executive 
Committee or SSC. The Office of Family and Community 
Advancement provides training, support, and materials for 
all election facilitators, and can facilitate elections provided 
that (a) a facilitator cannot be identified from within the 
school community, and (b) the school contacts Office of 
Family and Community Advancement with the election 
date, time, and location at least two weeks in advance. 
● OFCA recommends that the school’s Family Liaison is either 
the facilitator, co-facilitator, or observer of the election. 
● Elections for SSC and SPC parent reps must happen in the 
fall of the new school year. Spring elections will no longer be 
accepted. This is to help make opportunities for 
engagement in the councils more equitable.  
● Elections should be held at the first School Parent Council 
(SPC) meeting of the year and conducted at a time that is 
convenient for parents. The SPC consists of all parents in the 
school community. See Superintendent’s Circular FAM-01 for 
additional details. 
● Election of student SSC representatives at high schools 
should be incorporated into schools’ student government 
election process. 
● Schools should be prepared to provide translation and 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-02 
Page 9 of 14 
 
interpretation, as well as childcare, at the parent election 
and at the meetings as needed. 
● Parent elections typically take between 30 and 60 minutes. 
The election facilitator should be prepared to explain the 
role and purpose of the SPC and SSC, as well as provide an 
overview of each position and requirements of the election. 
● Parents or legal guardians of students currently enrolled at 
the school are eligible to be elected to the SSC. Note: 
parents/legal guardians who work at their child’s school 
cannot serve as the parent representative on the SSC. 
● Parents may be nominated and elected to serve on both the 
SSC and the SPC executive committee/team. 
● All families who are present at the election are allowed one 
vote per family per elected position. No absentee ballots will 
be accepted. 
● Voting may be conducted by secret ballot or by majority 
vote.  
● Upon completion of voting, each newly elected parent 
should complete an Elected Member Information Form and 
return it to the election facilitator. 
● After the election, the school is responsible for submitting all 
election results to the Office of Family and Community 
Advancement 
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SCHOOL PARENT COUNCIL AND 
SCHOOL SITE COUNCIL 
The School Parent Council elects parent members to represent 
the parent voice on the School Site Council. The SSC 
representatives are members of the SPC Executive Committee 
and should attend SPC meetings to provide regular updates on 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-02 
Page 10 of 14 
 
the SSC proceedings to ensure opportunities for parent input and 
feedback. All SSC meetings are open to the public; therefore, any 
parent, staff person, or community member can attend. However, 
only the elected representatives can vote on SSC decisions. 
SSC REPORTING 
All BPS schools are required to submit their SSC rosters and 
materials listed below directly to the Office of Family, Student 
and Community Advancement by October 31. Additionally, 
schools are required to submit the following documents for the 
purposes of demonstrating compliance with MA Open Meeting 
Law and BPS policy: 
● SPC roster 
● SSC roster 
● Personnel Subcommittee roster 
● SSC meeting calendar for the year 
● SSC meeting agendas, monthly 
● SSC meeting notes, monthly  
● SSC by-laws 
● Family Engagement Plan  
● Home-School Compact 
The first deadline for submitting this documentation is October 
31, at which time every school will be assigned one of the 
following statuses: 
● Full Compliance: School has uploaded SSC and SPC roster, 
as well as all other SSC documentation. 
● Reporting: School has uploaded SSC and SPC roster, with 
incomplete additional SSC documentation.  
● No Data: School has not uploaded SSC and SPC roster. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-02 
Page 11 of 14 
 
 
SSC meeting agendas and notes should be submitted on request 
for updated SSC status to be maintained and/or updated.  
SUPPORT AND TRAINING  
The Office of Family, Student and Community Advancement 
provides the following supports to schools to help them 
effectively conduct elections, provide the required 
documentation, and implement effective SSCs throughout the 
school year: 
● Required election materials 
● Election facilitation training 
● Election facilitation, in the event that the school is not able 
to identify a facilitator and is able to request an election 
facilitator at least ten school days in advance 
● SSC trainings, in collaboration with the BTU, on topics 
including SSC Basics, SSC Budget Basics, and Shared 
Decision-Making 
● SSC manuals, including specific tools to support SSC 
operations and answers to frequently asked questions 
● SSC trainings for high school students and adult allies 
● Ongoing support, coaching, and technical assistance. 
OPEN MEETING LAW REQUIREMENT 
SSCs serve as the decision-making body of the school and are 
subject to certain aspects of the Massachusetts Open Meeting 
Law, per DESE Regulations. According to these laws, SSCs must 
adhere to the following requirements: 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-02 
Page 12 of 14 
 
● Meeting dates and agendas must be posted publicly, with 
48 hours advance notice. 
● All SSC meetings must be open to the public. 
● Meeting minutes and notes must be shared, posted, and 
kept in a place at the school where they are accessible. 
For more complete information on the MA Open Meeting Law, go 
to www.mass.gov/ago/government-resources/open-meeting-
law/ 
ALIGNMENT WITH PRINCIPAL/HEAD OF SCHOOL EVALUATION 
Effective implementation and the authentic engagement of 
parent, teacher, and student voice align with the following 
standards of the Massachusetts School Level Administrator 
Rubric: 
● Indicator III-A1. Family Engagement 
o Engages parents, students, and teachers in creating a 
welcoming school environment and fostering a shared 
responsibility engagement. 
● Indicator IV-A-3. Professional Culture 
o Plans and leads well-run and engaging meetings that 
have a clear purpose, focus on matters of consequence, 
and engage participants in a thoughtful and 
productive series of conversations and deliberations 
about important school matters. 
● Indicator IV-B1. Policies and Practices  
o Creates opportunities for authentic parent, student, 
and teacher voice in school-based decision-making.  
● Indicator IV-E-1. Shared Vision Development 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-02 
Page 13 of 14 
 
o Parents, students, and teachers have an opportunity to 
shape the vision for the school as it pertains to 
instruction and school climate. 
● Indicator IV-F-3. Consensus Building  
o Decisions are made using a consensus model, in which 
all members of the SSC have an equal voice. 
o Resolves conflicts among members of the school 
community. 
IMPORTANT DATES  
Date 
Activity 
September 15 
Election dates submitted to the Family-School 
Engagement Practices Team, Office of Family 
and Community Advancement  
October 15 
Deadline for completing elections of all parent, 
student, and teacher SSC representatives and 
submission of rosters 
October 31 
Deadline for conducting first SSC meeting 
October 31  
Deadline for submitting all required 
documentation to the Office of Family and 
Community Advancement  
TBA 
Districtwide SSC trainings 
 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-02 
Page 14 of 14 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Family-School Engagement 
Practices 
Department: 
Office of Family and Community 
Advancement 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-7750 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent  


Page 1:
 
 
  
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER:  
FAM-06 
 
 
BOSTON STUDENT ADVISORY COUNCIL 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Massachusetts State Law Chapter 71: Section 38M. Student 
Advisory Committee states: School committees of cities, towns 
and regional school districts shall meet at least once every other 
month, during the months school is in session, with a student 
advisory committee to consist of five members to be composed 
of students elected by the student body of the high school or 
high schools in each city, town, or regional school district.  
MISSION STATEMENT 
The Boston Student Advisory Council advocates for and protects 
the voices of students in the Boston Public School system, 
empowers the student body to express their opinions regarding 
educational policy changes, and ensures that students are 
included in decision and policy making which impacts their lives 
and educational experiences. 
In the Boston Public Schools, students can apply to their school 
to serve on the Boston Student Advisory Council. The Boston 
Student Advisory Council (BSAC), a citywide body of student 
leaders representing their respective high schools, serves as the 
voice of students to the Boston School Committee, the 
superintendent, and central office departments. BSAC offers 
student perspectives on policies, initiatives, and reform efforts, 
and inform their respective schools about relevant citywide 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-06 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
school issues. They also address student issues by developing 
district-wide policies and working with student governments and 
heads of schools on school level policies and practices. 
BSAC is made up of a Full Council and Executive Committee. The 
Full Council is the think tank which generates the ideas for 
projects, and the Executive Committee is the leadership team of 
six (6) to twelve (12) students who serve as the advising body to 
the Boston School Committee and superintendent. The Executive 
Committee also plans and facilitates meetings with the support 
of the BSAC manager, facilitates youth engagement in district 
initiatives and departments, develops BSAC priorities, and 
monitors progress. 
Each Boston public high school (including district, exam, all high 
school-level alternative, pilot, and in-district charter schools) is 
required to have at least one and up to two BSAC representatives 
from their school. The BSAC representative is a part of the 
student government and must regularly attend student 
government meetings to share BSAC’s work, receive feedback, 
and gather input on projects/policies. Where possible, it is helpful 
to have a student representative who is on the School Site 
Council serve on BSAC as well. There are two ways students may 
become a BSAC member: (1) through student elections at the 
school level, or (2) through the BSAC application managed by the 
Office of Youth Leadership.  
ROLE OF BSAC MEMBERS 
1. To elect a leadership team that will serve in advisory to the 
School Committee as part of its decision-making process. 
2. To keep their Student Government and school community 
informed about relevant district initiatives and decisions, 
and actively seek and collect feedback to inform district 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-06 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
decision making through regular attendance and 
participation in Student Government meetings. 
3. To work on BSAC projects and initiatives.  
BSAC representatives will:  
• Represent their schools at BSAC meetings.  
• Assist in decision making for their schools by advising the 
administration on student-centered citywide issues and 
policies.  
• Work on policies that BSAC develops.  
• Perform tasks necessary to advance project work, such as 
surveys, meetings with heads of schools and Student 
Government advisors, peer interviews, etc. 
• Ensure representation of student voice for their school 
through continuous engagement with the Student 
Government and their broader student body. 
The Office of Youth Leadership is responsible for oversight and 
support of BSAC.  
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-06 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
September 29 First BSAC meeting for returning representatives 
October 15 
Deadline to hold Student Government Elections 
October 15 
 
Email names of Student Government 
representative(s) and BSAC member to Office of 
Youth Leadership, 
BSAC@bostonpublicschools.org  
October 28 
Deadline for youth to apply to City of Boston’s 
Success Link to qualify for a youth job slot. When 
possible, the Office of Youth Leadership partners 
with the City of Boston’s Department of Youth 
Engagement and Employment to provide paid 
youth jobs to BSAC members. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner 
Senior Director of Opportunity Youth 
Department: 
Department of Opportunity Youth 
Mailing Address: 443 Warren Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-9620 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FAM-04 
Version 01 
 
 
SCHOOL SITE COUNCIL PERSONNEL SUBCOMMITTEE  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Deepening partnerships with families is one of the key strategies 
for strengthening student learning and closing achievement 
gaps in the Boston Public Schools. Consistent with the principles 
of school-based management, the School Site Council engages 
parents and students in shared decision-making as a lever for 
school improvement.  The intention of the Personnel 
Subcommittee is to actively involve members of the school 
community in the teacher hiring process, as these decisions will 
have a significant impact on instructional practice and the lives of 
students.       
RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PERSONNEL SUBCOMMITTEE 
The responsibilities of the Personnel Subcommittee of the School 
Site Council are to: 
• Approve the hiring of new Boston Teachers Union (BTU) 
teachers’ bargaining unit staff and in-transfer of BTU 
teachers’ bargaining unit staff from other schools in the 
system and the choice of teachers from the excess pool. 
• Approve the selection of lead teachers, new teacher 
developers, mentor teachers, and new athletic coaches. 
• Determine the schedule and procedures for reviewing 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-04 
Page 2 of 5 
 
candidates for positions. 
 
The decisions of the Personnel Subcommittee are not subject to 
the approval of the School Site Council.   
PERSONNEL SUB-COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP 
1. The Personnel Subcommittee shall consist of two teachers, 
one parent, one student in high schools, and the 
principal/head of school or their designee.   
2. BTU members on the School Site Council shall select the BTU 
representatives to serve on the Personnel Subcommittee.  
3. The parent members of the School Site Council shall select 
the parent representative.   
4. The student members of the School Site Council at high 
schools shall select the student representative. 
5. The composition of the Personnel Subcommittee should 
reflect the racial and ethnic diversity of the school 
community to the extent possible.     
6. Teacher, parent, and student representatives on the 
Personnel Subcommittee may designate temporary 
replacement representatives to the subcommittee for 
specific positions. 
SCHOOL STAFFING 
The Personnel Subcommittee interviews and decides on the 
selection of permanent teachers who voluntarily apply for 
transfer into the school and the hiring of new teachers for 
vacancies, consistent with the terms of the current collective 
bargaining agreement between Boston Public Schools (BPS) and 
the BTU. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-04 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
OPEN POSTING 
In accordance with circular HRS-HS-07, schools must adhere to 
the requirements to open post. Therefore, schools must ensure 
that the Personnel Subcommittee of the School Site Council is 
formed and ready to begin the hiring process by March 1.  
Training related to personnel subcommittees is offered by the 
Office of Family and Community Advancement, the BTU, and the 
Office of Human Capital.   
PERMANENT AND PROVISIONAL TEACHERS 
In addition to permanent teachers who apply for transfer, a 
Personnel Subcommittee may consider a provisional teacher 
with a letter of reasonable assurance for a position which appears 
on the transfer list and that the provisional currently holds within 
the school. 
After interviewing candidates for a vacancy at a school that 
results from the transfer process, or if a vacancy at a school 
occurs after the completion of the regular transfer process, a 
school may choose to advertise or re-advertise the position.   
TIME COMMITMENT 
The Personnel Subcommittee is a standing committee of the 
School Site Council for the duration of the school year.  As such, 
the Personnel Subcommittee must be formed by October 31 and 
should meet as vacancies occur. The Personnel Subcommittee is 
not required to meet between the end of one school year and the 
beginning of the succeeding school year.  Before the summer 
recess, members of the Personnel Subcommittee should leave 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-04 
Page 4 of 5 
 
contact information with the principal/head of school, who will 
contact members prior to the interviewing or hiring of any 
teacher applicants. 
ALIGNMENT WITH EDUCATOR EVALUATION 
The Massachusetts School-Level Administrator Rubric includes 
Family and Community Engagement (Standard III) as one of four 
standards for effective principals/head of school practice.  
Engaging parents and students in shared decision-making as 
members of the Personnel Subcommittee aligns with Standard 
III, Indicator A, Family Engagement of the rubric.  Sharing 
evidence of effective implementation of the Personnel 
Subcommittee may be a valuable way for principals/heads of 
school to demonstrate proficient practice in Standard III.     
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION AND SUPPORT 
For additional information on the role and purpose of the School 
Site Council, shared decision-making, and school-based 
management, please refer to circular FAM-01 School Site Council 
and the School Site Council Manual. 
For additional information on school staffing and hiring, please 
refer to circular HRS-HS-07 School Staffing, Reassignment, and 
Hiring. 
Engagement staff from the Office of Family and Community 
Advancement (OFCA) are available to provide support, coaching, 
and technical assistance related to shared decision-making and 
school-based management to all BPS schools.  
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-04 
Page 5 of 5 
 
Additionally, OFCA and the BTU collaborate to provide training 
for schools on all aspects of the School Site Council, including the 
Personnel Subcommittee.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Family School Engagement 
Practice Team 
Department: 
Office of Family and Community 
Advancement 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Boston, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-7750 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
ODA-06 
Version 01 
 
 
 
PARTICIPATION GUIDELINES FOR TESTING ENGLISH 
LEARNERS ON STATEWIDE ASSESSMENTS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent versions. 
The purpose of this circular is to provide schools with the 
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education (MA DESE) guidelines for testing English Learner (EL)1 
students on statewide assessments.   
DEFINITION  
According to MA DESE, an EL student is a student whose native 
language is not English, and currently unable to perform ordinary 
classroom tasks in English. An EL student also scores less than 
proficient on an English language proficiency assessment. When 
a student has been identified as an EL according to MA DESE and 
U.S. Department of Justice requirements, a student retains this 
designation, regardless of their program setting until they meet 
 
1 English Learner (EL) refers to a specific subset of Multilingual 
Learners (MLs) who are classified as English learners. This term is 
used in federal and state laws, regulations, and policies. For more 
information, see MA DESE’s Guidance on English Learner 
Education Services and Programming, page 5, available at 
https://www.doe.mass.edu/ele/guidance/. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 2 of 13 
 
 
 
state exit criteria2. Students who meet the exit criteria must be 
reclassified as Former English Learners (FELs). 
PARTICIPATION REQUIREMENTS FOR EL STUDENTS 
Federal and state laws require that all EL students participate in 
statewide assessments. Massachusetts students will meet the 
requirements of these laws by participating in both the MCAS 
and ACCESS for ELLs tests.  
EL Participation Requirements in Statewide Assessments 
 
 
ACCESS  
Grades K2-12 
MCAS  
ELA 
Math 
Science 
and 
Tech/Eng 
First-Year 
EL 
Students3 
Required only for 
K2-12 grade 
students entering 
Optional4 
Required 
Required 
 
2 Students must score 4.2+ overall and 3.9+ in literacy on ACCESS 
for ELLs to be reclassified as former English learners (FELs). MA 
DESE will release Alternate ACCESS exit criteria in fall 2024. 
3 Results for first year EL students are not included in MCAS 
school and district summary results or in state accountability 
reporting. 
4 Optional, provided that the student has participated in ACCESS 
for ELLs testing. This first year exemption shall be applied one 
time. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 3 of 13 
 
 
 
before ACCESS 
for ELLs testing is 
completed 
All Other 
EL 
Students 
Required 
Required 
Required 
Required 
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 4 of 13 
 
 
 
ACCESS FOR ELLS AND ALTERNATE ACCESS FOR ELLS 
All EL students must be assessed annually to measure their 
English language proficiency and progress in learning English in 
the four domains of reading, writing, listening, and speaking. 
Students in grades K2-12 who are identified as EL must 
participate in ACCESS for ELLs testing or the Alternate ACCESS 
for ELLs for their grade. This requirement applies regardless of 
the number of years a student has been enrolled in U.S. schools 
and whether their parent or guardian has an approved request to 
opt-out of ESL services. The following students must participate:  
● students who were reported as EL in the October 2024 SIMS, 
and 
● students who enroll in school after the October 2024 SIMS 
submission and prior to February 7, 2025 who will be 
reported as EL in the March 2025 SIMS.  
Foreign exchange students who are coded as #11 under DOE013 
“Reason for Enrollment” in SIMS must participate in an ACCESS 
for ELLs test, if they are reported as English learners. They are also 
required to participate in the MCAS tests specified for the grade 
in which they are reported.  
ALTERNATE ACCESS FOR ELLS 
This is the state’s alternate English language proficiency 
assessment for EL students in grades K2-12. This assessment is 
designed specifically for those EL students with the most 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 5 of 13 
 
 
 
significant cognitive disabilities5 who are unable to meaningfully 
participate in ACCESS for ELLs, as indicated in the student’s IEP. 
This paper-based assessment is uniquely designed to monitor 
students’ progress in acquiring academic English.  
MCAS  
EL students must participate in all MCAS tests scheduled for their 
grades, regardless of the language program and services they are 
receiving or the amount of time they have been in the United 
States. The one exception applies to first-year EL students who 
enrolled in U.S. schools after March 1, 2025 and who were not 
reported in the March 2024 SIMS report, for whom only MCAS 
ELA testing in Spring 2025 is optional.  
Note: EL students in high schools need to pass MCAS tests as a 
state requirement for graduation. There are opportunities for 
retesting if students do not pass MCAS the first time. 
 
 
 
5 For more information, see 
https://www.doe.mass.edu/mcas/access/participation-
guidelines.html. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 6 of 13 
 
 
 
ASSESSMENT TESTING WINDOWS  
The testing windows for administering the SY2024-2025 annual 
assessments in Boston Public Schools are listed below: 
 SY 2024-25 Dates State Assessment 
Nov. 6- 7 
November 2024 MCAS HS ELA Retests 
Nov. 12-13 
November 2024 MCAS HS Mathematics Retests 
Jan. 6- Feb. 14 
2025 ACCESS for ELLs 
Feb. 4- 5 
February 2025 MCAS HS Biology and 
Introductory Physics Tests 
Mar. 6 & 7 
March 2025 MCAS HS ELA Retests  
Mar. 11- 12 
March 2025 MCAS HS Mathematics Retests  
Mar. 24 Apr. 18 
Spring 2025 MCAS Grades 3-8 ELA Test  
Mar. 25-26 
Spring 20254 MCAS Grade 10 ELA Test 
Mar. 28 
2025 MCAS Alternate Assessment (MCAS-Alt) 
Submission Deadline 
Apr. 28-May 23 
Spring 2025 MCAS Grades 3-8 Mathematics & 
Grades 5&8 STE Tests  
Apr. 28- June 6 
Spring 2025 MCAS Grade 8 Civics Test 
May 20 21 
Spring 2025 MCAS Grade 10 Mathematics Test 
June 4-5 
Spring 2025 MCAS High School STE Tests 
 
Note: dates are based on the State Initial Release of the 2024–25 
MCAS and ACCESS for ELLs Testing Schedule, as of 5/15/2024. 
These dates are not considered final until confirmed by DESE. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 7 of 13 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING EL STUDENTS IN THEIR FIRST 12 
MONTHS OF ENROLLMENT IN U.S. SCHOOLS 
For recently arrived ELs who have been enrolled in a U.S. school 
for the first time after March 1, 2024, and who were not reported 
in the March 2024 SIMS report, the following apply:  
1. The participation in ACCESS for ELLs or Alternate ACCESS 
for ELLs testing is required, provided that the student 
enrolls in school before February 7, 2025.  
2. The participation in Spring 2025 MCAS ELA assessment6 is 
not required but is recommended for student diagnostic 
purposes only. Testing in MCAS ELA is strongly encouraged 
to be considered an opportunity for students in high school 
grades to earn a passing score for graduation requirements.  
3. For students expected to participate in statewide 
assessments, non-participation in ACCESS and MCAS testing 
negatively impacts the school and district accountability. 
 
 
 
6 ELA testing is also optional for EL students from Puerto Rico 
who are in their first year of enrollment in a Massachusetts 
school.  


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 8 of 13 
 
 
 
SCHOOL AND DISTRICT REPORTING FOR EL STUDENTS  
Reporting 
Measure 
 
First Year ELs 
(1st year in any U.S. school) 
 
All Other ELs 
(Regardless of 
number of years 
enrolled in BPS) 
Students Reported 
in the district’s 
October 2024 SIMS 
or enrolled before 
February 7, 2025 
Students 
Enrolled after 
February 7, 2025  
Assessment 
Participation 
Rate for 
MCAS ELA is 
based on 
ACCESS 
Students are 
expected to take 
the ACCESS test to 
be counted in the 
school MCAS 
participation rate 
for ELA. Regardless, 
student’s 
participation in the 
MCAS ELA test is 
optional. 
 
If a student does 
not participate in 
ACCESS testing, the 
student counts as 
‘non-participant’ for 
MCAS in the 
Students count 
as participants 
regardless of 
participation in 
MCAS ELA 
testing. ACCESS is 
not required if a 
student enrolled 
at the end of the 
testing window.  
 
Students are 
expected to take 
the ACCESS test 
to be counted in 
the school MCAS 
participation rate 
for ELA. 
Otherwise, the 
student counts 
against the 
school MCAS 
participation rate 
for ELA.  
 
MCAS ELA testing 
is not optional.  
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 9 of 13 
 
 
 
Reporting 
Measure 
 
First Year ELs 
(1st year in any U.S. school) 
 
All Other ELs 
(Regardless of 
number of years 
enrolled in BPS) 
Students Reported 
in the district’s 
October 2024 SIMS 
or enrolled before 
February 7, 2025 
Students 
Enrolled after 
February 7, 2025  
school's MCAS ELA 
participation rate.  
Accounta-
bility 
Determina-
tions 
Students’ MCAS results7 are not 
included in the accountability 
calculations. For first year ELs who 
participate in ELA testing, results will be 
provided at the school level and will be 
used for Competency Determination 
purposes for high school students.  
Students’ MCAS 
results are 
included in the 
accountability 
calculations. 
 
 
 
 
7 First-year EL students must participate in MCAS Mathematics 
and Science and Technology/Engineering tests, although results 
will be reported for diagnostic purposes only and students’ 
results will not be included in school and district summary results 
or in state accountability reporting. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 10 of 13 
 
 
 
PROVIDING APPROPRIATE TESTING ACCOMMODATIONS TO ELS 
Testing accommodations involve changes to testing procedures, 
testing materials, or the testing situation to allow students 
meaningfully participate in an assessment. However, testing 
accommodations must not alter the test construct or the test 
content being measured.  
Testing accommodations for ELs are designed to address their 
unique linguistic needs during the normal process of English 
language acquisition. When appropriately assigned, testing 
accommodations offer ELs the opportunity to demonstrate 
knowledge in a subject, regardless of their English language 
proficiency level. This provides schools and divisions with an 
accurate picture of an EL’s content area achievement. 
EL students may be eligible for testing accommodations on 
MCAS assessments. Certain testing accommodations may be 
more appropriate for ELs at a particular language proficiency and 
for certain MCAS assessments. Decisions about accommodations 
for EL students should be made by the Language Acquisition 
team of educators familiar with the student. These decisions 
should be documented as described in the MA DESE MCAS 
Accessibility and Accommodations Manual. 
The following accommodations are available to ELs, with or 
without disabilities, on MCAS tests:  
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 11 of 13 
 
 
 
Accommodation 
Applicability 
Paper-based edition 
(EL1) 
May be administered to a first year EL student 
with a low level of English proficiency or an EL 
student who has little or no familiarity with 
technology (student does not use a computer 
routinely). 
Authorized Bilingual 
Word-to-Word 
Dictionary and 
Glossary (if available) 
(EL2)8 
List of authorized English/Native Language 
dictionaries (also available to Former ELs). 
Bilingual dictionary use for MCAS tests is strictly 
limited to those that provide word-to-word 
translations. Dictionaries that include definitions, 
synonyms, antonyms, phrases, and other 
information are prohibited. Electronic dictionaries 
are not allowed.  
Text-to-speech (TTS) 
(EL3.1) 
 
Next-generation computer-based Mathematics, 
grades 5 and 8 Science and Technology/ 
Engineering (STE) and/or high school Biology or 
Introductory Physics tests 
Human read-aloud 
(EL3.2) 
Next-generation computer-based or paper-based 
Mathematics and/or Science and Technology/ 
 
8 The use of DESE approved word-to-word bilingual dictionaries is 
strongly encouraged if students have demonstrated usage with 
need in accessing the native language definition. Some students 
with limited academic proficiency in their native language may 
find the dictionary usage a deterrent or a barrier to access the 
definition and translation. School teams are advised to use 
professional judgment in assessing the need based on the 
individual learner. 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 12 of 13 
 
 
 
Accommodation 
Applicability 
Engineering tests or legacy Mathematics or ELA 
Composition retests 
Scribe (including 
human scribe or 
speech-to-text) (EL4.1, 
EL4.2) 
Mathematics and/or STE tests or legacy ELA 
Reading Comprehension retest 
English/Spanish test 
version for 
Math/Biology/Physics 
only (EL7)  
Intended only for a Spanish-speaking EL student 
who has been in the U.S. for less than 3-years; 
Available in computer- and paper-based formats. 
 
 
The student should be introduced to an accessibility feature or 
accommodation as early as possible in the school year, prior to 
the assessment. Accessibility features and accommodations are 
intended to remove barriers and allow EL students to 
demonstrate their knowledge and skills more effectively and 
should never be provided for the first time on a statewide 
assessment. 
Please consider the following resources available: 
● MA DESE MCAS and ACCESS Participation Requirements 
● MA DESE Authorized Bilingual Word-to-Word Dictionaries 
and Glossaries for Use by ELs and FELs on MCAS 
● MA DESE MCAS Accessibility and Accommodations Site 
IDENTIFYING FIRST YEAR EL STUDENTS   


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-06 
Page 13 of 13 
 
 
 
A list of the identified first year ELs, students who have been in 
the U.S. for less than 12 months and are actively enrolled in your 
school, can be retrieved through SIS (ASPEN). On the ‘Student’ 
tab in the field set menu, filter for “First Year in U.S. Schools LEP 
Student.” A report will be generated based on the school 
enrollment up to the date of retrieval. 
In January 2025, the Office of Data and Accountability will flag 
these students in the SR/PNP file uploaded on the Spring 2025 
testing platform. Schools may later export this file to identify the 
First Year EL students. New first year EL students enrolled after 
January 2025 will not be coded in the file, but schools can identify 
them in ASPEN.   
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director 
Department: 
Office of Data and Accountability 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9450 
Email: 
all-acad-division@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
ODA-05 
Version 01 
 
 
 
BPS SURVEY ADMINISTRATION GUIDELINES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
OVERVIEW 
A federal statute, the Protection of Pupil Rights Amendment 
(PPRA), 20 U.S.C. §1232h, affords some protections for students 
and their parents before certain student surveys are conducted.  
Many student surveys, however, will not come within the scope of 
this statute.  Please assess each student survey carefully before 
administering it to determine if this policy applies.  A student 
survey that is anonymous or voluntary need not comply with the 
following policy.  Additionally, a student survey that is not 
developed or administered with funds received from the United 
States Department of Education also does not need to comply 
with this policy. 
For those student surveys that are developed or administered 
using federal education funds and in which a student is required 
to participate, the following policy applies.  This policy applies to 
those surveys that ask a student to reveal any of the following 
information:  political affiliation; mental illness or psychological 
problems; sexual behavior and/or attitudes; illegal, self-
incriminating, and demeaning behavior; critical appraisals of 
close family members; relationships to which a privilege is 
recognized, such as clergy, medical doctors, or attorneys; 
religious affiliations or beliefs; and income, other than for 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 2 of 10 
  
 
 
eligibility for participation in a program.  Prior to administering 
such a survey, the student’s parent or guardian must consent, in 
writing, to the student’s participation in the survey.  Also, a copy 
of the survey must be made available to the parent or guardian.  
Any such survey should also be brought to the attention of the 
Office of Legal Advisor. 
PERCEPTION SURVEYS 
Student, teacher, and family surveys are an effective tool to 
support success inside and outside of the classroom. These 
surveys are required district-wide; however, schools and 
programs may choose to administer additional surveys (please 
see further down for guidance about administering additional 
surveys). It is the responsibility of all in the Boston Public Schools 
to use the data that emerge from the surveys to ensure that 
every student receives what they need every day. 
Purpose 
The Boston Public Schools’ climate, culture, and feedback surveys 
support the district strategic goals of eliminating opportunity 
gaps and accelerating learning. The surveys: 
● provide teachers, administrators, students, parents, the 
district, and the community with information 
regarding climate, culture, engagement, and student 
learning. 
● are utilized to assess criteria for inclusion as a Family 
Friendly School. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 3 of 10 
  
 
 
● are included in measures to calculate school scores for 
the School Quality Framework and assignment tiers for 
the Home-based Student Assignment System. 
A robust survey system includes surveys that provide information 
on the classroom, school, and district levels and is responsive to 
needs at each of these levels.  
● At the classroom level, the student feedback survey 
provides teachers with data on student’s perceptions 
of instruction and classroom climate, so that teachers 
may create formative goals to better meet the learning 
needs of their students.   
● At the school level, the surveys provide school leaders 
and leadership teams with data to help them measure 
school success in relation to school and district goals; 
assess engagement and the creation of a safe and 
welcoming environment; and work with teachers to 
develop strategies that attend to priority areas.   
● At the district level, the surveys provide district leaders 
with information that allows them to determine if the 
system, individual schools, and central departments 
are making progress regarding the district’s long term 
strategic goals.  Information is needed to assess the 
effectiveness of specific initiatives being implemented 
to achieve those goals, to implement effective 
practices, and to eliminate practices that are 
unsuccessful.  Quality information allows comparisons 
across programs, schools, and classrooms to be data-
driven and equitable. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 4 of 10 
  
 
 
Administration Expectations 
Perception survey administration is required for students, staff, 
teachers, and families in Boston Public Schools during SY24-25. 
BPS administers the Student, Family, Teacher, and Staff Surveys 
through Panorama. Communications are sent centrally; however, 
school-based outreach makes the difference for many families! 
School leaders and coordinators have access to response rate 
tracking and completion lists via Panorama's platform. In 
addition, survey coordinators and school leaders are offered 
training and resources for administration prior to the survey 
window.  
The following table outlines the surveys required for students, 
staff, teachers, and families in Boston Public Schools during 
SY24-25, including the purpose, grade level, and administration 
windows. Specific dates are included in the annual assessment 
calendar released during summer 2024. 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 5 of 10 
  
 
 
 
BPS Districtwide Surveys 
Survey 
Purpose 
Grade 
Adminis-
tration 
Window 
Student 
Climate 
and 
Feedback 
Surveys 
Assesses perceptions of pedagogical 
effectiveness, rigorous expectations, 
relationships, engagement, 
classroom climate, school culture & 
community, belonging, mindset, 
school safety, and more 
3-12 
Mid-Year: 
December 
Spring: April-
May 
Senior Exit 
Survey 
Collects information regarding 
student postsecondary plans and 
overall experience in high schools. 
Gradua-
ting 
Seniors 
April-June 
Teacher 
Climate 
Survey 
Assesses perceptions of school 
climate, culture, relationships, peer 
victimization, school leadership, 
professional learning, etc 
All 
Mid-Year: 
December 
Spring: April-
May 
Staff 
Climate 
Survey 
Assesses perceptions of school 
climate, culture, relationships, peer 
victimization, and school leadership 
All 
 
Spring: April-
May 
Family 
Climate 
Survey 
Assesses perceptions of school 
climate, culture, school 
communication, school fit, school 
safety, engagement, etc. 
All 
Spring: April-
May 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 6 of 10 
  
 
 
Accessing Results 
Teachers and other school staff can access results in Panorama: 
secure.panoramaed.com. (Select “Sign in with Google” and 
choose your BPS email to log in). Results should be reviewed and 
considered with respect to how they may impact planning and 
adjustments, and the alignment with your School Improvement 
90 Day Action Plan: specifically, the Student Culture and Adult 
Culture goals. Resources to support are available in Panorama 
Academy. 
To ensure the data is a reasonable representation of their student 
population, school-level results are only shown if (1) the response 
rate is greater than 10%; and (2) there are at least 7 responses to 
ensure student confidentiality. Support is available through 
Panorama at support+bps@panoramaed.com. 
ADMINISTERING SURVEYS TO MULTIPLE SCHOOL 
COMMUNITIES OR WITHIN THE CENTRAL OFFICE 
The above guidelines and recommendations are to support the 
administration of surveys to students, families, and school staff. 
The remainder of this circular describes the process that will be 
used to create and administer surveys for central office staff or 
multiple school communities. To reduce the number of surveys 
that staff are required to respond to, the Office of Data and 
Accountability will review all surveys prior to their administration. 
Please refer to the BPS survey calendar for existing surveys and 
their timelines, if available. The process below describes how 
these offices will review survey creation and administration. 
Step 1: Survey Request Process 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 7 of 10 
  
 
 
If your office is interested in administering a survey to staff 
outside of your department, you will need to submit a survey 
request form to the Office of Data and Accountability. The form 
will collect information on:  
● the goals and objectives of the survey 
● decisions the survey is meant to inform 
● tabulations and analytics results that will inform the 
decision 
● confirmation that this information is not already being 
collected in other surveys 
● audience and users (especially if intended to for any 
outside agencies) 
● research approval requirement, if any 
● sensitivity of data being collected and any necessary 
security protections  
● ideal timeline for the survey/form to be administered 
as it relates to instructional priorities 
●  
● ideal method for distribution. 
Depending on the targeted survey population, surveys should be 
scheduled in coordination with any standing district surveys to 
mitigate overlap. Departments or teams must share the reasons 
for collecting information and how this information will be used. 
Whether responding to the collection of information is 
mandatory or voluntary, each team should take into 
consideration the timeline of requested responses in relation to 
other district required training, surveys, and events. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 8 of 10 
  
 
 
Step 2: Consultation 
Once you have submitted your survey request form, the Office 
Data and Accountability will meet with you to review your 
request and determine whether it is appropriate and distinct 
from other survey collection tools already in use by the district. If 
the survey is approved to be administered, the Office of Data and 
Accountability will be able to recommend a level of support for 
creating and administering the survey. Examples of ODA support 
may include, but are not limited to, item and domain 
creation/review, sampling strategy, survey administration timing, 
communication; design, hosting, and analysis of collected data. 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 9 of 10 
  
 
 
Step 3: Data Analysis and Dissemination of Information 
A plan for analysis of the survey data should be provided prior to 
initiating the collection of data. Teams are expected to keep 
detailed documentation of activities and decisions informed by 
the data collected. Departments should plan to identify which 
portions of their evaluation will be shared with participants. High 
visibility data, such as results that will be shared with the public, 
the School Committee, and/or School Committee task 
force/working groups should be shared with the Offices of the 
Superintendent and Data and Accountability to interpret results 
from the analysis and inform the process for future recurring 
surveys.  
BEST PRACTICES FOR SURVEYS AND DATA COLLECTION 
1. Shorter surveys will lead to increased response rates. 
Limiting the number of questions in a survey will increase 
the response rate and improve your overall ability to collect 
feedback. Surveys should be designed to minimize the 
respondent’s time and ideally designed to be completed on 
a mobile device in 3-5 minutes. 
2. Minimize open response answers. 
Open response answers (short or paragraph) will increase 
the amount of time it takes to complete a survey and can 
lead to degraded response quality. Using drop-
down/checkbox options as much as possible will improve 
your survey response rates and allow for easier data analysis. 
3. Do not collect data that we already have. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-05 
Page 10 of 10 
  
 
 
A common practice when designing surveys is to ask for 
data that we already have in a data system, such as names, 
grade levels, school name, etc. However, this increases the 
time to complete the survey and increases risk of data leak if 
the responses are not safeguarded. Collecting a 
respondent’s email address or emp/student ID number 
should be sufficient for identifying the person afterwards 
and additional identifying information that is already 
contained in a BPS data system should be used during 
analysis. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director 
Department: 
Office of Data and Accountability 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9450 
Email: 
all-acad-division@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
ODA-02 
Version 01 
 
 
TEST SECURITY AND ETHICS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The purpose of this circular is to ensure that all BPS staff 
understand and follow the appropriate procedures for test 
administration and security on all state and local tests where 
some or all content is deemed to be secure content that must 
not be given to or accessed by unauthorized persons. This 
includes, but is not limited to, paper or digital information. This 
circular also outlines the reporting requirements in the case of a 
security breach or a test irregularity. 
REQUIREMENTS 
Testing is not at the option of parent/guardian or the school, 
except if a student is not required to be tested based on certain 
conditions that are specified in the specific testing requirements. 
Appropriate testing accommodations must be provided to 
eligible students on test day as documented in the students’ 
current Individualized Education Programs (IEPs), Section 504 
Plans, or English Learner (EL) plans.  
School leaders and test administrators must read and adhere to 
all test procedures in the instructions that are issued by the 
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education (MA DESE) and/or the Boston Public Schools. Visitors 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-02 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
are never permitted in the school’s designated testing area; but 
MA DESE and/or BPS staff may make announced or 
unannounced visits to schools during testing days to ensure 
compliance with testing procedures. 
Schools must enforce a strict electronic devices policy during 
testing to maintain test security. The term electronic device 
includes any personal, non-educational device with an on-off 
switch (with the exception of medical equipment), most 
commonly cell phones, smart phones, iPods, iPads, iWatch, 
tablets, laptops, and pagers.  
Schools must clearly inform students that bringing an electronic 
device into the testing area violates district and state policy, and 
violation of this policy is grounds for confiscation. If brought to 
school during testing, electronic devices must be stored in a 
secure location away from students. Acceptable storage includes 
in a bag, backpack, locker, central location in a classroom, or 
school office. 
Consistent with the district’s Acceptable Use Policy (AUP), school 
leaders have the authority to enforce security measures on 
electronic devices when used to access testing materials and 
remove devices found to be in violation of the AUP. If any of the 
electronic devices are accessed during testing, the student’s test 
is compromised and is to be invalidated due to prohibited 
behavior, even if the student did not use the device. For 
suspected student cheating or electronic device violations, the 
school should conduct the investigation of the incident, report 
the test violation, and follow their school’s disciplinary 
procedures to impose sanctions.  


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-02 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
PENALTIES 
Failure by BPS staff to adhere to the Test Security and Ethics 
Requirements may result not only in sanctions and 
consequences imposed by the state as outlined in the specific 
assessment policy, but also in disciplinary action by the 
superintendent. 
PROCEDURES IF TEST IRREGULARITIES OCCUR OR IF YOU 
SUSPECT A SECURITY VIOLATION 
Each person directly involved in secure test administrations is 
responsible for immediately reporting any violation or suspected 
violation of test security. If questions arise concerning test 
security or if any situation occurs that could compromise any part 
of the test administration process and procedure for any state 
tests, call the MA DESE at 781-338-3625 immediately and/or 
report the incident using any required form. Please also advise 
your immediate supervisor and the Office of Data and 
Accountability. For any suspected BPS district assessment test 
violations or irregularities, contact the Office of Data and 
Accountability at 617-635-9450. 
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-02 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
For additional information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director 
Department: 
Office of Data and Accountability 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9450 
Email: 
all-acad-division@bostonpublicschools.org 
  
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
ODA-03 
Version 01 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES FOR ACCESSING 
STUDENT DATA 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
OVERVIEW 
Boston Public Schools recognizes and values the planning, 
research, and evaluation work done by our partner organizations, 
policymakers, and the greater education community to improve 
education. The Office of Data and Accountability has established 
the following guidelines regarding the processing of data 
requests to improve the quality, timeliness, security, and 
appropriateness of requests and request handling. Additionally, 
as the Office of Data and Accountability is charged with 
protecting student privacy and confidentiality, all student data 
requests will be evaluated against federal, state, and local data 
regulations to ensure student confidentiality.  
The following data sources are considered directory information. 
By federal, state, and local laws, they can be given to external 
parties without explicit consent from parents/guardians. All other 
student data are not considered directory and should not be 
shared with members of the public without express consent from 
parents/guardians or unless disclosure is expressly permitted by 
an exemption under federal or state law. Schools should not 
share any non-directory student data with external parties, 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 2 of 11 
 
 
members of the public, or media outlets. Common examples of 
non-directory information that should not be shared include, but 
are not limited to, date of birth, BPSID, and school name. All 
requests for non-directory student information should be 
directed to the Office of Data and Accountability.  
Directory Information: 
1. Student’s name  
2. Age  
3. Grade Level 
4. Dates of enrollment  
 
GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURE FOR ACCESSING STUDENT DATA 
Publicly Available Data 
The Boston Public Schools (BPS) and the Massachusetts 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (MA DESE) 
make a number of datasets and reports publicly available online. 
Before submitting a data request, please review Appendix I to see 
if your data request is included in publicly available data. 
Additionally, BPS departments regularly make presentations to 
the Boston School Committee. See Appendix I for links to 
materials from School Committee meetings.. Appendix I includes 
the following types of data available for public use.
● General data profile of 
BPS 
● Student Attendance 
and Discipline 
● Standardized test 
results 
● School Climate 
● Student Enrollment 
and Demographics 
● High School and 
Postsecondary


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 3 of 11 
 
 
 
For school personnel, there are additional reports available in 
Aspen and Panorama.  
Legal Guidelines on Requesting Student Data 
If your data needs are not met by publicly available reports 
provided by BPS and MA DESE (see Appendix I), you may be able 
to request certain additional data. The Family Educational Rights 
and Privacy Act (FERPA), the Massachusetts Department of 
Elementary and Secondary Education (MA DESE), and the Boston 
Public Schools establish regulations that maintain family and 
student data privacy rights. These regulations restrict BPS and 
schools governed by BPS from providing personally identifiable 
information without family or student consent1. Additionally, any 
individual or organization intending to use BPS student data for 
research and/or evaluation purposes must submit a research 
proposal to the district before any research activities, including 
administrative data sharing, may take place. Receipt of grant 
funds does not guarantee approval to conduct research by the 
BPS Office of Data and Accountability. Guidelines for conducting 
research in BPS and the research application can be found on the 
BPS website.  
For data requests that include either identifiable or de-identified 
 
1  Exceptions may apply to the general data request 
requirements. Three common exceptions include: 
1. District sponsored-studies to improve instruction (Studies); 
2. Evaluations or audits of federally-mandated programs 
(Audit); or 
3. Provisions of data to appropriate school and central office 
staff (School Official) 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 4 of 11 
 
 
student-level data, a written and signed agreement will be 
required, depending on the scope of the request. The Office of 
Data Accountability will communicate with all requesters to 
execute the appropriate agreements prior to sharing data. 
For requests for individual student records, please see the BPS 
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-7: Privacy of Student Information 
and Student Record Procedures: How to Respond to Student 
Record Requests in Compliance with FERPA and State Law.  
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 5 of 11 
 
 
In order to determine the next steps for your data needs: 
WHAT CATEGORY OF DATA IS REQUESTED? 
 
Level of Data 
Data Request Requirements 
Aggregate Data 
De-identified aggregate level data is generally 
available to requesters without explicit 
parent/guardian consent. Aggregate groups that 
contain fewer than 10 students will be suppressed to 
protect privacy. To gain access to this data please see 
the section below on the process to request data. 
Student-Level 
Administrative 
Data 
De-identified student-level administrative data 
requires a current signed non-disclosure agreement 
(NDA) with the Office of Data and Accountability. 
Student-Level 
Roster Data 
Identifiable student-level roster data requires current 
family consent as well as a current signed NDA with 
the Office of Data and Accountability. 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 6 of 11 
 
 
WHO IS REQUESTING DATA? 
Requester  
Notes  
BPS Officials 
and School 
Personnel 
School leaders have access to identifiable and individual 
student data only for the students in their school for the 
academic year that they are enrolled in the school. 
Teachers have access to identifiable and individual 
student data only for the students they are teaching in 
that academic year. 
Researcher 
All research requests must go through the research 
proposal process.  
BPS School- 
Community 
Partners 
BPS deeply values and recognizes school-community 
partnerships as a key strategy in our collective efforts to 
ensure all our students achieve success in college, career, 
and life. Data can be an important tool for partners to 
effectively collaborate with schools to strengthen 
services for students. For partners to collect or access 
any data about students, school-community partners 
must be fully registered on PartnerBPS. A complete 
registration on PartnerBPS includes registration of all 
programs the Partner runs in BPS and all partnerships 
they have with BPS schools. More information on the 
PartnerBPS registration process can be found here. 
Partners must also have active parental consent to 
obtain individual and identifiable data on students 
unless the request falls under the FERPA exceptions. 
Furthermore, partners must sign a Non-Disclosure 
Agreement with the district before receiving any data. If 
a school-community partner has any agreement with 
schools including memoranda of understanding, 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 7 of 11 
 
 
contracts for services, and/or school-based partnership 
agreements, this must also be provided when 
submitting a data request. Typical school-community 
partner data requests include student demographics, 
quarterly attendance, and course grades for consented 
enrolled students.  
Media 
All media requests must go through the BPS 
Communications Office. 
Agencies 
outside of BPS 
Agencies may receive aggregate level de-identified data. 
Any aggregate group of fewer than 10 students may be 
suppressed to protect student privacy.  
 
PROCESS FOR REQUESTING DATA 
To receive data according to the guidelines listed above, requests 
must be submitted through the Office of Data and 
Accountability’s Data Request Form.  
In preparation for completing the form, please have the following 
information available: 
● Purpose/Use: how will the requested data be used? 
● Intended Audience: with whom will you share the 
data/analysis? Note: depending on the nature of the data 
request, some data may not be appropriate for sharing 
with the public. 
● Summary of data request: please describe in detail what 
data is being requested, including school years, student 
population, student attributes, and data scope.  
 
Please note that if you are requesting data for a specific group of 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 8 of 11 
 
 
students, BPS student ID numbers or state-assigned student ID 
numbers must be provided. Requests without ID numbers will 
not be fulfilled. 
After submitting the form, requesters will receive an automatic 
confirmation email. If analysts have any clarifying questions, they 
will reach out to the requester within 3-5 business days. While 
ODA endeavors to fulfill all non-research requests within 15 
business days, high volume and more complex requests may 
dictate a longer turnaround time. As such, we will attempt to 
fulfill partner data requests with an already executed NDA within 
15 business days; and, we will attempt to fulfill research requests 
with a fully executed NDA within 25 business days. Please plan 
accordingly when submitting a data request. The Office of Data 
and Accountability reserves the right to deny certain data 
requests.  
► All requests from the media must go through the BPS 
Communications Office. Communications can be 
reached at 617-635-9265 or 
communications@bostonpublicschools.org. 
► All public records requests should be submitted through 
the City of Boston’s online Public Records Center. 
FEES FOR DATA REQUESTS 
Some data requests may incur a fee, dependent on size, the time 
required, and the scope of the request. Upon receipt of a data 
request, the Office of Data and Accountability will communicate 
with the requester and provide a fee estimate, if applicable. 
 
For additional information about this circular, contact: 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 9 of 11 
 
 
Owner 
Senior Executive Director 
Department: 
Office of Data and Accountability 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9450 
Email: 
rc069@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 10 of 11 
 
 
APPENDIX I: PUBLICLY AVAILABLE DATA  
Overview of Boston Public Schools 
● BPS At a Glance 
● Facts and Figures 
● Boston District Profile (MA DESE) 
● BPS School Profiles (MA DESE) 
● Data and Reports produced by the Office of Data and 
Accountability 
● School Committee Meetings Materials 
Standardized test results 
● MCAS results by school and district, with options to 
disaggregate by subgroup and grade level 
● PARCC results by school and district, with options to 
disaggregate by subgroup 
● NAEP results 
● ACCESS results 
Student Enrollment and Indicators 
● Attrition 
● Enrollment by Grade - Number of students by grade 
● Enrollment by Kindergarten - Enrollment by Kindergarten 
● Enrollment by Race/Gender - Percent of public school 
students by race and gender. 
● Enrollment by Selected Population - Number and percent 
of public school students in subgroups: First Language 
Not English (FLNE), English Language Learners (ELL), 
Students with Disabilities, High Needs, and Low Income. 
● Enrollment for Students with Disabilities and CVTE 
● Mobility Rate Report - Students transferring into or out of 
public schools, districts, or the state. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-03 
Page 11 of 11 
 
 
● Student Attendance Report 
● Student Retention Report 
● Student Discipline - Student Discipline data is reported 
from the Student Safety and Discipline Report (SSDR) 
● Student Discipline Days Missed Report - Student 
Discipline Days Missed Report 
School Climate 
● Reports can be found on the BPS website.  
High School and Postsecondary Data 
● Advanced Placement Participation - Number of students 
who took one or more Advanced Placement exams for 
each subject. 
● Advanced Placement Performance - Number of students 
who received each possible score on the Advanced 
Placement exam for each subject. 
● Dropout Report - This report provides the percentage of 
Massachusetts public high school graduates who drop 
out of high school. 
● Graduates Attending Higher Ed. - Graduates Attending 
Higher Ed. 
● Graduation Rates - Percent of students who graduate 
with a regular high school diploma within 4 or 5 years by 
student group. 
● MassCore - The Massachusetts High School Program of 
Studies (MassCore) is intended to help our state's high 
school graduates arrive at college or the workplace well 
prepared and reduce the number of students taking 
remedial courses in college.  
● Plans of High School Grads  
● SAT Performance 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
ODA-01 
Version 01 
 
 
PROCEDURES FOR CONDUCTING EDUCATIONAL 
RESEARCH 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The purpose of this circular is to define the policy and procedures 
for conducting educational research in the Boston Public 
Schools. 
OVERVIEW 
The mission of the Boston Public Schools’ Office of Data and 
Accountability is to serve the BPS community by facilitating 
access to quality information and building capacity to make data-
driven decisions that advance educational equity, opportunity, 
and achievement for all students. Research is one way to 
facilitate our community’s access to quality information. It is the 
responsibility of the Office of Data and Accountability to ensure 
that researchers have access to quality data and can responsibly 
interpret the results. As such, the Office of Data and 
Accountability reviews and approves research that works to 
advance educational equity, opportunity, and achievement for all 
students by ensuring responsible access to and use of quality 
data. 
All research activities must be coordinated through the Office of 
Data and Accountability’s BPS Research Team. ODA approval is 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-01,  
Page 2 of 4 
 
not required for research that uses data that is publicly available 
sources such as on the BPS public website. A list of current 
sources of publicly available data can be found in the appendix of 
the Policy and Guidelines document. In these instances, the 
researcher may use the data presented from these sources as 
long as the sources are cited, and any modifications or analysis 
done by the researcher are clearly delineated. Approval by the 
researcher’s IRB and/or BPS school leaders does NOT guarantee 
approval of research proposals by the BPS Office of Data and 
Accountability (ODA). While research may be approved by ODA, 
BPS school leaders have the final say in whether their particular 
school will participate in any given study. 
WHO MAY CONDUCT RESEARCH 
Any academic or professional organization or any individual 
doing doctoral work may submit a proposal to conduct research 
with the Office of Data and Accountability in BPS. Doctoral 
candidates must submit written evidence that their proposed 
research has been approved by their university’s IRB and will be 
supervised by their advisor(s). 
WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF THE RESEARCH TEAM REVIEW? 
While it is necessary for all research submissions to have an 
approved/exempted IRB decision from their own institution, BPS 
requires that all research is submitted to the BPS Research Team 
for review prior to BPS approval. The BPS research review is not 
duplicative of the IRB process and aims to ensure the following: 
● The research is aligned with district priorities. 
● The research follows federal and local guidelines 
regarding conducting research with human subjects in 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-01,  
Page 3 of 4 
 
school settings (This includes consent forms for all 
research participants; assurance that students receive no 
incentives of monetary value for students and not to 
exceed $50 for teachers; voluntary participation for all 
research subjects). 
● The research is not overly burdensome to classrooms and 
is new research that will advance the aims of the district. 
● The research is fully supported by an internal BPS staff 
member (district sponsor) who is committed to using the 
result of the research. 
WHAT ARE THE STEPS TO CONDUCTING RESEARCH IN THE 
BPS? 
1. Submit a research proposal adhering to the Guidelines and 
Procedures. In general, the research submission and review 
calendar is as follows: 
Review Period Submission 
Month 
Review Month Decision Letter 
Sent 
P1 
June 1-30 
July 1-31 
Mid-August 
P2 
October 1-31 
November 1-30 Mid-December 
2. For primary research (i.e., interviewing, focus groups, 
observations, and in-person surveys), each researcher needs 
to have submitted and passed a CORI check. 
3. For secondary research (i.e., requesting administrative data: 
records that are maintained by the school district), 
researchers need to submit a data request and sign a 
standard NDA template. NOTE: for some administrative data 
requests, a fee will be assessed to assist in the fulfillment of 
the data pull.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-01,  
Page 4 of 4 
 
4. Submit policy brief updates annually to your district sponsor 
and the Research Team 
(research@bostonpublicschools.org). 
5. Annually renew your research proposal with the BPS 
research team.  
6. For continuing research, the following needs to be 
submitted: 
a. Cover page describing research activities already 
conducted and proposed changes to the study for the 
next year 
b. Most recent policy brief describing interim findings 
c. Updated district sponsor letter 
d. Updated IRB approval for next year of research 
7. Submit a final report and policy brief (template) for review to 
research@bostonpublicschools.org once the study has been 
finalized. The study is officially finalized once the final report 
and policy brief have been approved. 
For additional information about this circular and the 
application process, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director 
Department: 
Office of Data and Accountability 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9450 
Email: 
all-acad-division@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
ODA-04 
Version 01 
 
 
 
BPS BALANCED ASSESSMENT SYSTEM  
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Student assessment is an effective tool to support success inside 
and outside of the classroom. Assessment takes many forms, and 
it is the responsibility of all in the Boston Public Schools to use 
the data that emerges from assessments to ensure that every 
student receives what they need every day. 
PURPOSE 
The Boston Public Schools assessment system supports the 
district's strategic goals of eliminating opportunity gaps and 
accelerating learning. The assessment system: 
● provides teachers, administrators, students, parents, 
the district, and the community with ongoing 
information regarding student progress in relation to 
state frameworks. 
● ensures all our students are prepared for college, 
career, and life. 
A balanced assessment system includes formative and 
summative assessments that provide information on the 
classroom, school, and district levels and is responsive to needs at 
each of these levels.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-04 
Page 2 of 7 
  
 
 
1. At the classroom level, the assessment system provides 
teachers with data on students’ strengths and needs so that 
teachers may develop lessons that respond to individual 
differences.  
2. At the school level, the assessment system provides school 
leaders and instructional leadership teams with data to help 
them measure school success based on school and district 
goals:  
a. Assess the effectiveness of curriculum, instruction, and 
professional development programs. 
b. Work with teachers to develop strategies that attend 
to priority areas.  
3. At the district level, the assessment system provides district 
leaders with information that allows them to determine if 
the system, individual schools, and central departments are 
making progress regarding the district’s long-term teaching 
and learning goals. Information is needed to assess the 
effectiveness of specific initiatives being implemented to 
achieve those goals, to implement effective practices, and to 
eliminate practices that are unsuccessful. Quality 
information allows comparisons across programs, schools, 
and classrooms to be data-driven and equitable. 
ASSESSMENT EXPECTATIONS  
For SY24-25, district assessment expectations will maintain its 
instructional focus on Equitable Literacy across all content areas 
to strengthen equitable Multi-Tiered System of Support (MTSS), 
laying a strong Tier 1 infrastructure to become a fully inclusive 
district and expand access to bilingual/native language 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-04 
Page 3 of 7 
  
 
 
instruction. As BPS more consistently implements effective 
equitable literacy practices, the data provided by assessments 
will inform educators to meet the learning needs of all students. 
These expectations are a minimum for schools; school 
communities are encouraged to craft the assessment strategy 
that supports their own work towards grade-level, standards-
aligned, culturally responsive instruction.  
The following tables outline the formative and summative 
assessments in use in Boston Public Schools during SY24-25, 
including the purpose, grade level, participation expectation and 
frequency. 
BPS FORMATIVE ASSESSMENTS 
Assessment 
Purpose 
Grade 
Expectation 
Frequency 
PALS/ 
Heggerty 
Screener for all 4-year-
old students in K1 used 
to understand student 
progress in relation to 
developmental 
benchmarks. 
K1 
Required 
2x per 
year 
NWEA MAP 
Reading 
Fluency 
Computer adaptive 
universal screening tool 
that assesses early 
literacy skills, oral 
reading fluency, and 
reading 
comprehension; DESE 
approved dyslexia 
screener. 
K2–2 
Required 
3x per 
year 
3 
Required 
2x per 
year 
 
(extended 
test 
windows) 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-04 
Page 4 of 7 
  
 
 
BPS FORMATIVE ASSESSMENTS 
Assessment 
Purpose 
Grade 
Expectation 
Frequency 
NWEA MAP 
Reading 
Growth 
Computer adaptive 
universal screening tool 
that assesses reading 
comprehension; 
identifies what 
students are ready to 
learn next. 
3 
Required 
2x per 
year 
 
4–11 
Required 
3x per 
year 
NWEA MAP 
Math Growth 
Computer adaptive 
universal screening tool 
that assesses 
mathematical skills; 
identifies what 
students are ready to 
learn next. 
3–11 
Required 
3x per 
year 
Pre-IPT 
Diagnostic measure of 
English language 
proficiency of pre-
school children whose 
home language is not 
English, in compliance 
with federal law. 
K0* 
*ML 
students 
Required 
1x per year 
WIDA 
Kindergarten 
Screener  
Diagnostic measure of 
English language 
proficiency in 
compliance with 
federal law for English 
Language Learners. 
K1* 
*ML 
students 
Required 
1x per year 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-04 
Page 5 of 7 
  
 
 
BPS FORMATIVE ASSESSMENTS 
Assessment 
Purpose 
Grade 
Expectation 
Frequency 
Interim 
Assessments 
in ELA and 
Math 
Standard-aligned 
assessment to measure 
student access to 
grade-level content. 
2–11 
Strongly 
Recommended 
2x per 
year 
Interim 
Assessments 
in Science 
Standard-aligned 
assessment to measure 
student access to 
grade-level content; 
unit-based. 
3 - 10 
Strongly 
Recommended 
3x per 
year 
Language 
Acquisition 
(TBD) 
Standard-aligned 
assessment to measure 
English language 
acquisition  
K2-12* 
*EL 
students 
TBD 
2x per 
year 
 
Additionally, all district supported curricula include ongoing, 
curriculum-embedded, formative assessments (classroom tasks 
and formal assessments) to provide real-time information to 
educators about what students have learned and are ready to 
learn next. 
BPS SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENTS 
Assessment 
Purpose 
Grade 
Expec-
tation 
Fre-
quency 
MCAS 
Annual assessment of grade 
level content standards for 
state and federal 
accountability. 
3 - 8, High 
School 
Required 
1x per 
year 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-04 
Page 6 of 7 
  
 
 
BPS SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENTS 
Assessment 
Purpose 
Grade 
Expec-
tation 
Fre-
quency 
ACCESS for 
ELLs 
Annual assessment for EL 
students; measures English 
language proficiency and 
progress in compliance with 
federal law. 
K2 - 12* 
*EL 
students 
Required 
1x per 
year 
SAT 
A standardized assessment 
that assesses mathematics 
and evidence-based 
reading/writing; used by most 
colleges and universities to 
make admissions decisions.  
11 
Strongly 
Recom-
mended 
1x per 
year 
PSAT/ 
NMSQT 
A standardized assessment 
that assesses much of the 
same content (evidence-based 
reading/writing and 
mathematics) that is on the 
SAT; 
10, 11 
Strongly 
Recom-
mended 
1x per 
year 
AP 
Standardized exams designed 
to measure how well students 
have mastered the content 
and skills of a specific AP 
course. 
10 - 12* 
*students 
in AP 
courses 
Strongly 
Recom-
mended 
1x per 
year 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-04 
Page 7 of 7 
  
 
 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director 
Department: 
Office of Data and Accountability 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9450 
Email: 
all-acad-division@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
ODA-07 
Version 01 
 
 
 
REQUIRED DOCUMENTATION TO WITHDRAW 
STUDENTS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
This circular lists the documentation schools are required to 
obtain when withdrawing students and includes information on 
monitoring processes conducted by the central office.  
For the last several years, Boston Public Schools has been under a 
state audit regarding our documentation of student withdrawals. 
Auditors found that we collect insufficient documentation of 
students categorized as withdrawals. The audit finding has been 
upgraded to a “material weakness,” which is a more severe 
finding. Lack of action could result in loss of federal funds (e.g., 
Title 1) and/or the City’s overall credit rating. The Systemic 
Improvement Plan required the district to revise withdrawal 
procedures and implement controls for monitoring. All 
administrative school staff (school leaders, registrars, or any 
school administrator whose responsibilities involve enrolling or 
withdrawing students) are required to complete asynchronous 
training at the 2024 Management and Operations Institute. 
OVERVIEW OF REQUIRED DOCUMENTATION 
This section seeks to clarify what documentation is required and 
acceptable. Schools can use this template to document 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-07 
Page 2 of 9 
 
 
 
interactions with families and upload along with supporting 
documentation or with a family signature. Your school may use 
your own template as long as it contains the necessary 
information and has been approved by the central office (contact: 
student-withdrawal@bostonpublicschools.org). 
ACCEPTABLE DOCUMENTATION TYPES FOR STUDENTS 
WITHDRAWING INCLUDES: 
1. A written request for a student’s records from a receiving 
public or private high school or an educational program 
(that culminates in a regular high school diploma). This 
includes requests from the receiving school that come to 
the district through Scrib Order. 
2. Written record of a response from an official receiving 
school or program acknowledging the student’s enrollment. 
3. Written confirmation from a parent or guardian that their 
student has moved to another state or country and will be 
continuing their education. 
4. Written confirmation from a parent/guardian updating the 
school enrollment status of their child, including indication 
that they will be continuing their education elsewhere. 
5. Letter from the BPS Office of Expanded Learning Time, 
indicating an approved Educational Plan for homeschooling. 
6. Record from the state's data system (Edwin DESE Security 
Portal - Central Office Process) 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-07 
Page 3 of 9 
 
 
 
If you do not have the above documentation at the time of 
withdrawal, the student must be withdrawn as a dropout. See 
Appendix for a table of withdrawal codes with acceptable 
matching documentation. 
REQUIRED ELEMENTS OF SUFFICIENT WITHDRAWAL 
DOCUMENTATION FOR A TRANSFER STUDENT INCLUDE: 
1. Date when the transfer occurred or was confirmed, 
including the year. 
2. Identifiable name of the student withdrawing 
3. Identifiable information for who is confirming the 
withdrawal, such as the parent name or receiving school 
registrar’s email address 
4. Indication that the student is continuing their education 
elsewhere 
a. New school name is ideal but not required. Stating a 
student will enroll in a school elsewhere is sufficient if 
the new school name is not known. 
Withdrawal documentation must be uploaded to the student 
record in Aspen at the time of the withdrawal in a non-editable 
format, such as a PDF, screenshot, scanned handwritten & signed 
withdrawal form or letter. Word documents, Aspen journal 
entries, travel tickets or itineraries are not acceptable forms of 
documentation to confirm a transfer. 
MONITORING AND ACCOUNTABILITY 
School leaders will be required to identify a primary point of 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-07 
Page 4 of 9 
 
 
 
contact at their school for withdrawal related processes. 
Additionally, school leaders will be required to sign off that they 
have reviewed student records and that sufficient 
documentation exists for each student’s withdrawal code. This 
sign off will align with the October state reporting period. Central 
office staff will hold office hours and be available to answer 
questions that may arise at this time period and will 
communicate these dates via the Friday Flyer and Weekly Recap.  
Additionally, the central office team will be conducting periodic 
audits to confirm sufficient documentation is in place: Fall, Mid-
Year, End of Year. Supervisors of attendance will be included as a 
resource to support schools in gathering the necessary 
documentation during review periods. 
For questions and support, please contact the following: 
General Questions 
student-withdrawal@bostonpublicschools.org  
Technical Questions 
about Aspen 
Kevin Arias, karias@bostonpublicschools.org  
Graduation and 
Dropout Reporting 
Apryl Clarkson, 
aclarkson@bostonpublicschools.org  
Student Attendance 
Requirements 
Brian Marques, 
bmarques@bostonpublicschools.org  
School Specific 
Questions 
Supervisors of Attendance, Regional 
Operational Leader and then School 
Superintendent  
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-07 
Page 5 of 9 
 
 
 
TECHNICAL RESOURCES 
Withdrawal Code Guidance 
How to Update Withdrawal Codes in Aspen 
How to Upload Documents in Aspen 
"Did Not Report" Protocol for Students with IEPs 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director 
Department: 
Office of Data and Accountability 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9450 
Email: 
student-
withdrawal@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
 Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-07 
Page 6 of 9 
 
 
 
APPENDIX A: TRANSFER CODES WITH REQUIRED 
DOCUMENTATION 
BPS 
Code 
BPS Description 
State 
Code 
State 
Description 
Required 
Documen-
tation Type 
06 
Mass. Public Boston Resident 
20 
Transferred — 
In state public 
1, 2, 4 
 
09 
EOY Flip Record 
10 
Batch Assignment process school 
change 
12 
Mass. Public Non-Boston Resident 
42 
Discharged to Charter School 
43 
Discharged to Virtual School - Mass 
Public 
98 
Residency Violation 
99 
Discharged - Student ID Error 
01 
Boston Parochial 
21 
Transferred — 
In state private 
1, 2, 4 
03 
Mass. Parochial Non-Boston 
Resident 
04 
Mass. Parochial Boston Resident 
07 
Mass. Private (Non-Parochial) 
Boston Resident 
11 
Boston Private (Non-Parochial) 
13 
Mass. Private (Non-Parochial) Non-
Boston Resident 
15 
Home (*KINDERGARTEN ONLY) 
44 
Discharged to Virtual School - Mass 
Private 
19 
Out of Country 
22 
 
Transferred — 
Out-of-State 
(public or 
private) 
1, 2, 3, 4 
14 
Out of State 
1, 2, 4 
45 
Discharged to Virtual School - Out 
of State 
1, 2, 3, 4 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-07 
Page 7 of 9 
 
 
 
05 
Home Schooled 
23 
Transferred — 
Home-school 
5 
30 
Adult Diploma Program 
24 
Transferred — 
Adult diploma 
program 
leading to MA 
diploma 
1, 2, 4 
SS 
No longer receiving special ed 
services only 
41 
Transferred — 
no longer 
receiving 
special 
education 
services only. 
 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-07 
Page 8 of 9 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B: NON-TRANSFER WITHDRAWAL CODES 
BPS 
Code 
BPS Description 
State 
Code 
State Description 
17 
Graduate 
04 
Graduate with a Competency 
Determination 
95 
Expelled from BPS 
05 
Expelled 
96 
Expelled from Other School 
System 
97 
Multiple Expulsions 
16 
Death 
06 
Deceased 
18 
Student Reached Maximum 
Age (22 yrs.) 
09 
Reached maximum age did not 
graduate or receive a Certificate 
of Attainment 
33 
Certificate of Attainment 
10 
Certificate of Attainment 
31 
Grade 12 - Met local 
requirements/Did not pass 
MCAS 
11 
Completed grade 12 and district-
approved program. (District does 
not offer a Certificate of 
Attainment) 
23 
GED 
30 
Dropout — Enrolled in a non-
diploma granting adult education 
or HiSET program 
27 
Non-Diploma Educational 
Program (non GED) 
32 
Job Corps 
31 
Dropout — Entered Job Corps 
22 
Military Service 
32 
Dropout — Entered the military 
28 
Incarcerated 
33 
Dropout — Incarcerated district 
no longer providing educational 
services 
21 
Work 
34 
Dropout — Left due to 
employment 
24 
Over 16/No plans known 
35 
Dropout — Confirmed Dropout 
plans unknown 
25 
Illness 
26 
Married Pregnant or Parenting 
51 
Registered - Did Not Report 
36 
Dropout — and/or student 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-07 
Page 9 of 9 
 
 
 
52 
Moved - No Forwarding Address 
status/location unknown 
D1 
DNR More Than 8 Days 
 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PP05 
Version 01 
 
EMPLOYEE ATTENDANCE  
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Poor attendance adversely affects the work we can accomplish 
and the morale of all Boston Public Schools employees. 
Attendance will be monitored throughout the year at all levels. 
Any excessive absences, tardiness, or perceived abuse of time 
off/leave benefits will be investigated and may subject the 
employee to discipline. The procedures described herein may not 
occur if the superintendent exercises their statutory authority to 
dismiss, demote, or suspend.  
ATTENDANCE MONITORING PROCESS 
1. Sign in/out: Managers1 must establish and supervise a paper 
sign in/out procedure that provides an accurate record of 
the date and time of arrival and departure of all employees 
 
1 The term "manager" refers to positions such as academic 
superintendent, senior officer, headmaster, principal, senior 
program director, and director. A manager may in some cases 
delegate authority to carry out these procedures to supervisory 
personnel reporting to them. 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP05 
Page 2 of 5 
 
assigned to them. Employees must comply with the sign 
in/out process. An employee who fails to comply with the 
procedure, falsifies such a record, and/or fraudulently 
reports their or another’s time will be subject to discipline 
up to and including termination. 
2. Report your absence/early departure: Managers must 
establish a process to report an absence/early departure due 
to illness. Employees must follow the process created and 
implemented by their manager for each absence/early 
departure. If the employee fails to follow the protocol 
established by the manager, the employee’s absence/early 
departure will be unexcused, and the employee will not be 
paid for the day(s)/hour(s) of absence(s). The employee may 
also be subject to discipline up to and including termination. 
a. Employees not serving in schools must follow the 
protocol set by their manager. In the case of early 
departure, the employee must notify their manager 
before leaving the building.  
b. If the employee’s absence is for more than five (5) 
consecutive days, refer to the Absence and Leaves 
circular. Regardless of the duration of the time off due 
to illness, managers may at any time request medical 
documentation from the employee to substantiate 
their absence. 
3. Reasonable accommodations:  An employee seeking 
reasonable accommodations for a disability may contact the 
Office of Equity (617-635-9650) to begin an interactive 
dialogue process. Employees who inform their managers 
about a disability will be referred to the Office of Equity by 
the manager. The district will attempt to provide reasonable 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP05 
Page 3 of 5 
 
accommodations unless it would cause an undue hardship 
or fundamentally alter the district’s programs. Medical 
information concerning any employee will be maintained in 
strict confidence.  
Chapter 151B and the ADA define a person with a disability 
as someone who: (1) has a physical or mental impairment 
that substantially limits one or more major life activities; (2) 
has a record of such an impairment; or (3) is regarded as 
having such an impairment. Major life activities include, but 
are not limited to: caring for one’s self, performing manual 
tasks, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, or learning.  
The person may also qualify for an extended or intermittent 
leave of absence. Please refer to the Absence and Leave 
Policy circular and your collective bargaining agreement or 
conditions of employment for more information.  
For more information about the reasonable 
accommodations process, please see Superintendent’s 
Circular EQT-07. 
PATTERNS OF ABUSE 
When a manager determines that an employee’s absences 
and/or tardiness exhibits a pattern of abuse and/or raises 
concern, the manager will address it directly with the employee 
in the way the manager deems appropriate (i.e., informal 
meeting versus investigatory meeting). The employee will have 
the right to union representation at all types of meetings.  
In the past, the following scenarios have been deemed as 
patterns of abuse (the list is not exhaustive/exclusive): 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP05 
Page 4 of 5 
 
1. 
Four (4) or more separate absences before or after the 
weekend or holiday/vacation 
2. 
Sick absences lasting six (6) or more consecutive days 
without a physician’s certificate 
3. 
Scattered sick days/leave throughout the school year 
exceeding or projected to exceed fifteen (15) or more days 
4. 
Two (2) or more absences, consecutive or closely 
patterned, following layoff notification 
5. 
Two (2) or more absences, consecutive or closely 
patterned, following contract non-renewal notification 
6. 
Two (2) or more absences immediately following poor 
performance evaluation 
7. 
Absence during a previously scheduled investigatory 
meeting 
8. 
Absence after receiving a notice of an investigatory 
meeting 
9. 
Absence on day of release or scheduled release of poor 
performance evaluation 
10. 
Patterns of two (2) days out, two in, one out, etc. 
11. 
Tardiness: two (2) or more days within a one-week period 
12. 
Tardiness: two (2) or more days within a two-week period 
CONSEQUENCES FOR ABUSE AND/OR EXCESSIVE 
ABSENTEEISM/TARDINESS: 
The following are the consequences an employee will face when 
they have been deemed to engage in a pattern of abuse and/or 
excessive absenteeism/tardiness. These consequences can be 
applied individually or in conjunction with one another.  
1. 
Discipline up to and including termination 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP05 
Page 5 of 5 
 
2. 
Requirement to provide medical documentation 
substantiating each absence (past, present, and future) 
3. 
No pay for time out of work if the employee fails to 
provide requested medical documentation for absences; 
the absences will be unexcused. 
4. 
Issuance of an “unsatisfactory/does not meet standards” 
rating on the employee's performance evaluation 
attendance/punctuality standard. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Employee Services 
Department: 
Human resources 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
E-mail: 
OHCLeaves@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER:  
HRS-PP19 
Version 01 
 
 
 
PERFORMANCE-RELATED DISMISSAL PROCESS  
FOR TEACHERS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
In the event the performance evaluation of a teacher results in a 
recommendation for dismissal by a Principal or Head of School, 
the following procedures will be followed: (1) the Superintendent 
shall review all processed recommendations for dismissal and (2) 
if the Superintendent approves the recommendation to dismiss 
the teacher, the Principal or Head of School may institute 
dismissal proceedings set forth in M.G.L. c. 71, section 42. 
Note: A teacher may be removed from the classroom, dismissed, 
or suspended for just cause prior to the completion of the 
evaluation-related process specified in this Circular. 
TERMINATION REQUIREMENTS 
The minimum requirements to proceed with a teacher 
termination can be met in one of two ways, both in cases where 
the teacher was placed on an Improvement Plan: 
If the Evaluator determines that the Educator is not making 
substantial progress toward proficiency, the Evaluator shall 
recommend to the superintendent that the Educator be 
dismissed. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP19 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
If the evaluator determines that the Educator’s practice 
remains at the level of unsatisfactory, the Evaluator shall 
recommend to the superintendent that the Educator be 
dismissed. 
 
Copies of the following information will be submitted to the 
Superintendent via the Office of Labor Relations in order to move 
forward with a recommendation for termination: 
1. 
All less-than-proficient performance evaluations you are 
relying on for potential termination. 
2. 
All other performance evaluations within the last two years. 
3. 
All written feedback to the teacher following an observation 
in which you saw a need for improvement. 
4. 
All correspondence regarding pre-evaluation and post-
evaluation meetings. 
5. 
All written notes from pre-evaluation or post-evaluation 
meetings. 
6. 
A log documenting all artifacts (e.g., syllabus, lesson plan, 
evidence of planning, etc.) submitted to you by the teacher. 
7. 
All notes and correspondence from the teacher concerning 
evaluations, classroom observations, and other matters 
relating to their performance. 
8. 
Correspondence from teachers, parents, or other individuals 
regarding a teacher’s performance, complimentary or 
critical. 
9. 
Attendance and tardiness records and correspondence if 
attendance and/or tardiness is an issue or if the teacher’s 
absences have affected contractually required timelines. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP19 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
10. 
A log documenting any allegations of discrimination brought 
by the teacher to the BPS Office of Equity or the 
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (MCAD), 
e.g., race, age, gender, disability. 
11. 
All documentation about any disciplinary action taken 
against the teacher, only if relevant to performance issues. 
12. 
A draft letter from the principal notifying the teacher of BPS’ 
intent to dismiss based on unsatisfactory performance. 
 
Steps of the termination procedure: 
1. 
The principal/head of school recommends to the 
Superintendent that a teacher be terminated. 
2. 
If the Superintendent approves the recommendation, the 
teacher receives a letter from the principal/head of school 
notifying them of BPS’ intent to dismiss. 
3. 
The teacher has 10 school days after receiving the notice 
of intent to dismiss to meet with the principal/head of 
school to review the decision. 
4. 
After the meeting, if the termination decision remains 
unchanged, the principal/head of school sends the 
teacher a letter communicating the termination decision. 
5. 
The teacher with professional teacher status may seek 
review of the termination decision within 30 days by filing 
a petition for arbitration with the Commissioner of 
Education. 
  
  
For more information about this circular, contact: 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP19 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
Owner: 
Director of Labor Relations 
Department: 
Office of Labor Relations 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Boston, MA 
02119 
Phone: 
617-635-1576 
Fax: 
617-635-7959 
E-mail: 
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-L01 
Version 01 
 
 
 
STATE LICENSURE AND REQUIREMENTS FOR 
TEACHERS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
According to Massachusetts General Law, all teachers must hold 
a valid license issued by the Massachusetts Department of 
Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE) in the most 
appropriate subject and grade level corresponding to their 
teaching assignment(s). Teachers are not hired by BPS unless 
they qualify for the appropriate license or license waiver. A waiver 
permits the district to employ an unlicensed teacher for one 
school year only and does not count as a license. Waivers are 
requested only by the BPS Office of Human Resources in rare 
circumstances where there are no licensed candidates available 
to fill a position.  
This Superintendent’s Circular provides guidance for meeting 
Massachusetts state licensure requirements.  
I. DATA COLLECTION AND TRACKING PROCEDURES 
To collect and track data about the licensure of BPS teachers and 
paraprofessionals, the BPS Office of Human Resources requires 
online reporting of critical information, including Massachusetts 
Tests for Educator Licensure (MTEL) results, licensure status, 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L01 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 
 
coursework, and degree information of teachers. All teachers and 
their administrators must comply with these data collection 
procedures. Furthermore, it is every educator’s professional 
responsibility to know their personal licensure status and take 
the necessary steps to maintain their license validity.  
II. MASSACHUSETTS STATE LICENSURE REQUIREMENTS  
A. Know what license is required by your teaching position: 
o The license required for your position should be made 
clear to you upon hire, but when in doubt, ask your 
principal/head of school, Human Resources 
coordinator, or Human Resources manager. 
o The fundamental requirement is that teachers must 
possess the license that affords the most appropriate 
fit for their teaching assignment. For example, while it 
may seem acceptable for a teacher of 6th grade math 
and science to work under an Elementary (1-6) license, 
the MA DESE offers a Middle School Math/Science (5-8) 
license which is a more appropriate license for this 
teaching assignment. 
o For more information about currently offered licenses 
and specific requirements, visit 
www.doe.mass.edu/licensurehelp.  
o Individual’s official state licensure records and history 
can be accessed securely through the MA DESE’s ELAR 
portal at https://www.doe.mass.edu/licensure/elar/. If 
you do not know your username and/or password, click 
on "Forgot username/password" and it will walk you 
through some steps to retrieve the username and reset 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L01 
Page 3 of 8 
 
 
 
the password. If you still have difficulty, you can call the 
DESE Licensure Help Desk at 781-338-6600 and they 
should be able to reset it for you.  
o See Attachment A for guidance on which “type” of 
license (Provisional, Initial, Professional, Temporary) 
suits your level of preparation and/or experience. 
B. Apply for the appropriate license. 
o When interested in obtaining a new license, or 
advancing your non-professional license, the best first 
step is to apply for the license you plan to pursue. Even 
if you have not yet met all of the requirements, this is 
DESE's opportunity to evaluate your standing with 
regard to the current requirements and give you 
written instructions on what remains to be done. They 
leave all applications open until you are granted the 
license. 
o Online applications can be submitted through the MA 
DESE’s ELAR portal at 
https://www.doe.mass.edu/licensure/elar/, where you 
indicate which license you are interested in obtaining 
and pay the application fees. Applications cost $100 for 
the first submission and $25 for each additional. 
o Submit official transcripts (undergraduate and 
graduate) to the MA DESE by mail or in person. The 
address is: 
Office of Educator Licensure 
Mass. Dept. of Education 
75 Pleasant Street 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L01 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 
 
Malden, MA 02148 
o Additional documentation, such as out-of-state 
teaching licenses and letters verifying applicable 
teaching experience or preparation, may also need to 
be submitted.  
o Upon review of your application and transcripts, the 
MA DESE will notify you in writing if additional 
documentation or clarification is necessary, or if you 
still have additional requirements to complete. This is 
called the evaluation letter. It will give you instructions 
on your next steps. 
o Make sure your social security number appears on all 
documents sent to MA DESE. 
C. Take and pass all relevant MTELs. 
o The test(s) you are required to take will be dictated by 
the DESE, based on the application that you submitted. 
General information about which tests are required for 
which license can be found online at 
www.doe.mass.edu/licensurehelp. If you still aren’t 
certain which tests you need, and you do not have time 
to wait for the DESE’s evaluation letter, you may call 
the Office of Human Resources at 617-635-9600.  
D. Advance or renew your license. 
o Teachers who hold a temporary, provisional, or initial 
license are required to be working to advance toward a 
professional license. See attachment A for guidance on 
the progression of licenses. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L01 
Page 5 of 8 
 
 
 
o Teachers who hold a professional license must renew it 
every five calendar years. There is an expiration date 
associated with each individual’s professional license 
indicating when it needs to be renewed.  
o Renewal of a professional license requires the 
completion of 150 Professional Development Points 
(PDPs) within the five-year renewal period. At least 15 of 
these points must be in the content of the license (i.e., 
what you teach). The next 15 points must be in 
pedagogy (i.e., how you teach). Fifteen points must be 
in Sheltered English Immersion or English as a Second 
Language (SEI or ESL), 15 points must relate to training 
in schooling methods for students with disabilities 
and/or diverse learning styles, and the remaining 90 
points can be in “elective activities” that address other 
educational issues or improve student learning, 
content knowledge, or pedagogy.  
o The activities that teachers participate in to earn PDPs 
should be dictated by their Individualized Professional 
Development Plan (IPDP), which must be reviewed 
and signed for approval by their principal/head of 
school every two years. Signed copies of the approved 
IPDP must be maintained in the school building. 
o Visit https://www.doe.mass.edu/pd/ipdp.docx to view 
or print an IPDP template. 
o Online applications for renewal can be submitted 
through the MA DESE’s ELAR portal at 
https://www.doe.mass.edu/licensure/elar/ after all PDP 
requirements have been completed. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L01 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 
 
o All educators and other employees seeking licensure 
related verifications must complete this form.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Licensure Manager 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9212 
Email: 
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L01 
Page 7 of 8 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENT A 
Massachusetts Teacher Licensure – At a Glance 
MASSACHUSETTS EDUCATOR LICENSURE 
Licenses granted by the Massachusetts Department of 
Elementary & Secondary Education 
75 Pleasant Street, Malden, MA 02148 
781-338-6600 
www.doe.mass.edu/licensurehelp 
 
YOU MAY START HERE… 
PROVISIONAL LICENSE  
TEMPORARY LICENSE  
• Valid for 5 years of employment  
• For people who have not 
completed an approved 
educator preparation program  
Requires:  
• A bachelor's degree  
• Passing score(s) on MTEL 
www.mtel.nesinc.com 
• Additional coursework required 
for elementary, early childhood, 
moderate disabilities, severe 
disabilities, library, and/or 
instructional technology  
• Valid for 1 calendar year  
• For experienced teachers 
from another state  
Requires:  
• Possession of a valid 
educator license/certificate 
from another state that is 
comparable to at least an 
initial license in 
Massachusetts  
• 3 years teaching under a 
valid out-of-state 
license/certificate 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L01 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 
 
…OR YOU MAY START HERE:  
INITIAL LICENSE 
PROFESSIONAL LICENSE 
• Valid for 5 years of employment  
• (May be extended one time for 5 
additional years of employment)  
Requires:  
• A bachelor's degree  
• Passing score(s) on MTEL, 
www.mtel.nesinc.com 
• Completion of an approved 
educator preparation program   
 
• Valid for 5 calendar years  
Requires:  
• 3 years of employment 
under the Initial license  
• Completion of a beginning 
teacher induction program 
• One of the capstone 
options for the Professional 
license (i.e., master’s degree 
including or in addition to 
12 graduate credits in 
content) 
• Continuing professional 
development required to 
renew Professional licenses 
every 5 calendar years 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PP11  
Version 01 
 
DRUG FREE WORKPLACE POLICY AND PROCEDURE 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
It is the policy of the Boston Public Schools to maintain a 
workplace free from all unlawful drugs and substances and to 
insist that all staff, students, contracted providers, and others 
who work, attend, and/or visit facilities under the jurisdiction of 
the School Department avoid unlawful drug and substance use 
and abuse at all times.  In compliance with the federal Drug-Free 
Workplace Act of 1988 (P.L. 100-690) and its implementing 
regulations, all employees of the Boston Public Schools, 
contracted providers, students, and visitors to facilities under the 
jurisdiction of the School Committee are hereby notified that the 
unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, or 
use of a controlled substance (as listed in schedules I-V of Section 
202 of the Controlled Substances Act) is prohibited. Violations of 
this policy shall be subject to the provisions of federal and state 
law, to procedures relative to the discipline of employees, and to 
the provisions of the Code of Conduct of the Boston Public 
Schools. 
All employees must abide by this policy as a condition of 
employment.  Employees must notify their immediate supervisor 
within forty-eight (48) hours of any conviction (including a plea of 
nolo contendre) of a violation of any federal or state criminal drug 
law by an action committed in the workplace.  The employee’s 
immediate supervisor will notify the Office of Human Capital. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP11 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Within ten (10) days of receiving notice of such a conviction, it will 
be the responsibility of the superintendent or designee to notify 
the funding agency in those cases where the employee is directly 
engaged in the performance of work and is paid through a direct 
federal grant. The Development Office will prepare, annually for 
the Office of Human Capital, a list of employees covered by this 
provision of the regulations. 
Within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of such conviction, an 
investigation will be initiated. It will be the responsibility of the 
superintendent to recommend disciplinary action, including but 
not limited to suspension or dismissal. 
Boston Public Schools staff should be made aware of the services 
available through the City of Boston Employee Assistance 
Program (B.E.A.P.). Responsibility Center managers and directors 
are urged to refer to the B.E.A.P. any employee who 
demonstrates symptoms of drug or alcohol abuse at 617-635-
2200 or eap@boston.gov. The program is located at 43 Hawkins 
St., Boston. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Employee Services 
Department: 
Office of Human Capital 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street, Roxbury MA 02119 
Fax: 
617-635-7956 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Email:  
employeeservices@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PP03 
Version 01 
 
TUITION REIMBURSEMENT BTU AND ADMINISTRATIVE 
GUILD MEMBERS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The Boston School Committee (BSC) has agreed to several 
programs that allow for reimbursement of tuition costs to eligible 
collective bargaining unit members in exchange for a 
commitment of continued employment. 
BOSTON TEACHERS UNION MEMBER ELIGIBILITY 
Permanent teachers who are not eligible for a career award and 
who commit to three years of continuous employment in the 
Boston Public Schools will be reimbursed for tuition expenses 
accrued in a given school year. Payment will not exceed $1,000 
per teacher per school year.  
Per agreement between BSC and BTU, provisional teachers who 
have completed at least one year of service in the Boston Public 
Schools will be eligible for a tuition reimbursement payment not 
to exceed $500 per school year. 
This definition of eligibility is explicitly meant to include those 
employees who are in job titles that are compensated based on 
Group I or Group II of the BTU salary schedules. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP03 
Page 2 of 11 
 
ABA SPECIALISTS ELIGIBILITY 
Per agreement between BSC and BTU, ABA specialists who have 
completed at least one year of service shall be eligible for tuition 
reimbursement of up to $500 per year for approved college or 
graduate credits. 
At three years of successful employment, ABA specialists will be 
eligible for tuition reimbursements of up to $1,000 for approved 
college courses until they become eligible to receive their career 
award.   
PARAPROFESSIONALS ELIGIBILITY 
Per agreement between BSC and BTU, all paraprofessionals who 
have completed five or more years of full-time service as of the 
end of the prior school year will be entitled to tuition 
reimbursement of up to $1,000 a year for approved college 
courses. 
Per agreement between BSC and BTU, all paraprofessionals who 
have completed more than three years of full-time service as of 
the end of the prior school year will be entitled to tuition 
reimbursement of up to $500 a year for approved college 
courses. 
ADMINISTRATIVE GUILD MEMBERS ELIGIBILITY 
To be eligible to receive tuition reimbursement, members of the 
Administrative Guild must have served at least one full school 
year commencing on September 1 prior to the year in which the 
tuition reimbursement application is filed. 
Tuition reimbursement for members of the Administrative Guild 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP03 
Page 3 of 11 
 
is capped at $1,000 per member, per year. 
ELIGIBLE COURSES 
All coursework must be approved by the assistant 
superintendent of Human Capital (or designee), consistent with 
the current policy. Further, eligible courses for school year 2023-
2024 are courses that begin anytime from September 1, 2023 
through August 31, 2024. Courses that meet the criteria 
established for salary lane advancement as articulated in 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 will be considered eligible 
for tuition reimbursement. 
The Boston Public Schools will only reimburse employees for the 
cost of the class itself and does include consultant or facilitator 
fees. Please send receipts of out-of-pocket payment directly from 
the institution in which your transcript was issued. 
GUILD: All courses, certificate programs and job-related training 
must be approved by the assistant superintendent of Human 
Capital, consistent with current policy. 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP03 
Page 4 of 11 
 
APPLICATION PROCESS 
To receive tuition reimbursement payments, eligible employees 
must submit: 
● A signed Form PS-03 (Personnel Action Request Form).  In 
the “Pay Adjustment” category, place a check mark in the 
tuition reimbursement block. 
○ The PS03 form can be downloaded here: 
https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B9Pn1K0-
QB_FWTRJV2JaSDdNbEU/view?resourcekey=0-
y7E5QNx7B_HmLeFHKLJauQ  
○ Employees must sign and date the form in the 
“Originator’s Signature / Date” block.  
● BTU: A signed affidavit agreeing to three continuous years 
of employment with the Boston Public Schools. A copy of 
the affidavit is attached to this circular. An affidavit is not 
required for paraprofessionals or members of the 
Administrative Guild. 
● Official original transcripts clearly indicating a passing 
grade and graduate credit was awarded from an accredited 
institution. Undergraduate course work is accepted for 
paraprofessionals and Administrative Guild members. 
Electronic transcripts must be sent directly to the Office of 
Human Capital. Please send to 
EmployeeServices@BostonPublicSchools.org 
* Guild members are also eligible for completion of 
certificate programs. 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP03 
Page 5 of 11 
 
● Documentation of tuition payment.  This documentation 
should be in the form of receipt for an out-of-pocket  
payment or a credit card statement indicating that payment 
was made to the institution from which courses were taken 
and credit was granted. 
Submit all materials to: 
Employee Services Department 
Boston Public Schools 
2300 Washington Street 
Roxbury, MA 02119 
 
PAYMENT OF TUITION REIMBURSEMENTS 
The Office of Human Capital will make every effort to issue tuition 
reimbursements within 60 days of receipt of all required 
application documentation as listed above.   
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
September 1 
Start of reimbursement year 
August 31 
 
Deadline for submitting tuition reimbursement 
documentation to be processed for the 
previous academic year 
August 31 
End of reimbursement year 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP03 
Page 6 of 11 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Employee Services 
Department: 
Office of Human Capital 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA  02119 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
employeeservices@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP03 
Page 7 of 11 
 
AFFIDAVIT FOR BTU (TEACHER) MEMBERS 
I hereby agree to continue my employment with the Boston 
Public Schools for three continuous years from the date of receipt 
of tuition reimbursement payment in the qualifying amount of 
$500 or $1,000.00. All course work must be approved by the 
assistant superintendent of Human Capital, consistent with 
current policy, prior to my reimbursement of monies. If I fail to 
continue my employment for three continuous years, I agree to 
reimburse the Boston Public Schools for the entire amount of 
$500 or $1,000.00 within one month of my discontinuance of 
service with the Boston Public Schools. Failure to do so will result 
in initiation of legal action by the Boston Public Schools to 
receive said monies. 
Check one: 
____I am a Permanent Teacher entitled to $1,000. 
____I am a Provisional Teacher entitled to $500. 
Signed under the pains and penalties of perjury. 
 _________________________________________________________________   
Signature 
 
______________________________________________    __________________  
 
Print Name 
Date 
 
Witness signature: ______________________________________________  
BPS: BTU DUAL LICENSE REIMBURSEMENT FOR BTU 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP03 
Page 8 of 11 
 
TEACHERS 
Per the most recent Collective Bargaining Agreement effective 
from September 1, 2022, through August 31, 2024, (the “CBA”) 
where a position requires two licenses and the incumbent does 
not possess the same, educators will be required to obtain a 
second license. Teachers will be reimbursed for up to $3,000 in 
expenses incurred to obtain the required second license.  
BOSTON TEACHER UNION MEMBER ELIGIBILITY 
Teachers who are required by BPS to obtain another license to 
teach in their existing position and do not currently hold the 
required license. 
Per the CBA, BPS will reimburse teachers up to $3,000 during 
their employment with BPS for the cost of obtaining another 
license required by BPS for the teacher’s position, including but 
not limited to those working under a waiver or emergency 
license. 
ELIGIBLE COURSES 
Teachers shall be reimbursed for the following expenses incurred 
to obtain the required license: 
● MTEL prep courses from a provider on a list established by 
the Office of Human Capital   
● MTEL tests 
● Graduate coursework1 
 
1 Credit equivalency is not considered graduate course work 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP03 
Page 9 of 11 
 
● License Fees 
● BPS Pathway Programs 
Reimbursements will be considered provided teachers submit 
receipts to the Office of Human Capital within the fiscal year that 
expenses were incurred.  
This definition of eligibility is explicitly meant to include those 
employees who are in job titles that are compensated based on 
Group I or Group II of the BTU salary schedules. 
APPLICATION PROCESS 
To receive the Dual License reimbursement payments, eligible 
employees must submit: 
● A Google form response 
○ The Google form can be found here: 
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSf35H7BTyp
O0rLPZKgzRgKTi3lQfbyRycfy0sgFaNi5IvHlfA/viewform 
○ All submissions must include proof of payment. 
● A copy of the Dual Licensure Notice informing the 
incumbent that their position will require two licenses going 
forward. 
● Documentation of expenses payment. This documentation 
should be in the form of receipt for an out-of-pocket 
payment, or a credit card statement indicating that 
payment was made to the institution from which courses 
were taken and credit was granted. Documentation should 
be clearly dated. 
Submit all materials via Google form. 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP03 
Page 10 of 11 
 
PAYMENT OF DUAL LICENSE REIMBURSEMENTS 
The Office of Human Capital will make every effort to issue Dual 
License reimbursements within 60 days of receipt of all required 
application documentation as listed above.   
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
September 1 
Start of reimbursement year 
August 31 
 
Deadline for submitting Dual License 
reimbursement documentation to be 
processed for the previous academic year 
August 31 
End of reimbursement year 
 
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP03 
Page 11 of 11 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
School Based Staffing 
Department: 
Office of Human Capital 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA  02119 
Fax: 
617-635-9600 
Email: 
For additional questions, please submit an 
HR Inquiry Ticket via the Beacon. This can be 
found on Access Boston. 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PP01  
Version 01 
 
CONTRACTUAL BENEFITS: CAREER AWARDS, SALARY 
LANES, SALARY STEPS, ACADEMIC LADDER CREDITS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Boston Public Schools offer numerous contractual benefits such 
as career awards and salary lane increases based on the 
completion of accredited coursework, degrees, academic ladder 
credits, and continuing education units. To receive these benefits, 
employees must submit the appropriate documentation 
(described below) to the Office of Human Capital. Once their 
documentation is submitted, employees will receive confirmation 
via email, within 4 to 6 weeks, except during peak seasons. 
1. CAREER AWARDS 
Career awards are issued monthly by anniversary date, based on 
a monthly reporting cycle in the Office of Human Capital, and 
vary by union affiliation. PS03s are no longer needed to initiate 
this process, except for BASAS members, who are required to 
submit a request via PS03. If an award is not received, the 
employee should then submit a PS03 to the Office of Human 
Capital to address the issue: 
• In the “Pay Adjustment” category, place a checkmark in the 
career award block and specify the career award requested. 
• Indicate initial date of employment. 
• Sign and date the “Originator’s signature/date” block.  


Page 2:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 2 of 12 
 
Career awards are effective on an employee's anniversary date. 
Employees will see their career award reflected within 2-3 pay 
periods. Denied applicants will receive an email from the Office of 
Human Capital (to the employee’s bostonpublicschools.org email 
address) providing the reason for the denial. 
Paraprofessionals: Career awards are awarded by the number of 
working days completed, not (wholly) by academic year 
completed. The schedule of awards is as follows: 
Step 
Length of Service 
2 
3 Years 
3 
6 Years 
4 
9 Years 
5 
12 Years 
Career Award 
1,800 Paraprofessional Seniority Days 
Career Award 
2,800 Paraprofessional Seniority Days 
Career Award 
3,800 Paraprofessional Seniority Days 
Career Award 
4,800 Paraprofessional Seniority Days 
Career Award 
5,800 Paraprofessional Seniority Days 
 
BTU: Career Awards are awarded at the completion of the 
threshold year, for the start of the next academic year. 
All other collective bargaining units: Career awards are awarded 
on an employee’s anniversary date based on a monthly reporting 
cycle. 
2. SALARY LANES 
Employees who qualify by contract for a change in salary lane as 


Page 3:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 3 of 12 
 
a result of the completion of accredited course work and degrees 
must submit a PS-03 to receive this benefit.  Lane changes are 
not made automatically. 
• In the “Pay Adjustment” category, place a checkmark in the 
salary lane block and specify the salary lane requested. 
• Attach official original transcripts documenting accredited 
courses and/or degree completion. Transcripts for 
accredited graduate coursework must include a passing 
grade and/or a degree conferred date for acceptance. 
Electronic transcripts must be sent directly from the 
institution to EmployeeServices@BostonPublicSchools.org. 
Boston Public Schools In-Service and Academic Ladder 
certificate(s) must be printed. An In-service/Academic 
Ladder transcript summary is not acceptable.  
• Sign and date the “Originator’s signature/date” block. 
➢ Employees should only submit credits/degrees when 
applying for salary lane advancement; employees 
should not submit single or multiple credits below the 
threshold for lane advancement.   
Approved applicants can expect to see a change in their salary 
within 3-4 pay periods following submission of a salary lane 
application. Denied applicants will receive an email from the 
Office of Human Capital (to the employee’s 
bostonpublicschools.org email address) providing the reason for 
the denial. Please note that this process will take longer in the 
summer months (June – September). 
Salary lane changes will be processed retroactively to September 
1 if the application is received in the Office of Human Capital by 
the close of business on September 30. Otherwise, the change 
will be effective on the first day of the month following complete 


Page 4:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 4 of 12 
 
submission of all documentation during the school year. 
Submissions after May 31 will be effective for the start of the 
following school year. 
Note: Boston Public Schools reserves the right to approve salary 
lane advancement for only those courses that are related to the 
field of education or enhance advancement up the educational 
career ladder. Requests for pre-approval of any courses shall be 
responded to by the Office of Human Capital promptly. Courses 
must meet the following criteria: 
Accredited College or University Courses 
1. Courses must be granted by an accredited college or 
university listed on the Accredited Institutions of Post-
Secondary Education registry and deemed acceptable by 
the American Council on Education. 
2. Courses must award graduate credit.  If the transcript does 
not clearly state the course is at graduate level, then the 
applicant must supply a letter from the institution verifying 
the course is offered for graduate credit.  Note: for 
paraprofessionals, undergraduate credit and in-service 
credits are acceptable for salary lane advancement, up to a 
bachelor’s degree. 
3. Courses are evaluated by the semester hour only. Courses 
taken by the quarter credit hour will be converted by the 
metric specified by the respective institution. If a conversion 
rate is not specified, Boston Public Schools will use a .75 to 
1.0 ratio.  
4. Courses must clearly relate to the field of education in the 
Boston Public Schools. 


Page 5:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 5 of 12 
 
Academic Ladder Credit 
An Academic Ladder Credit, also known as an “ALC”, is a new 
“credit” for academic lane advancement. ALCs are equal in value 
to in-service credits, with no cap on the amount one can earn.  
Each ALC course has a clearly articulated target competency and 
a range of options for demonstrating this competency through 
artifacts or reflections. ALCs require approximately 12 hours of 
“seat time” per credit. Credit will not be awarded until the 
educator submits a final product demonstrating successful 
implementation of a specific instructional practice. Options for 
demonstrating may include lesson or unit plans, videos, student 
work analyses, reflections, or some combination of these.  
Employees should only submit ALC credits/degrees when 
applying for salary lane advancement. When doing so, employees 
should submit the actual ALC completion certificate from Vector. 
Only ALCs approved by the Boston Public Schools will be 
awarded credit for salary. 
Available ALC courses can be found on Vector. Additionally, a list 
of frequently asked questions can be found in APPENDIX A. 
In-Service Courses  
Course credit may be granted for courses previously offered by 
the Boston Public Schools. Only courses approved by the Boston 
Public Schools will be awarded credit for salary purposes. 
Employees should submit the actual in-service completion 
certificate, available on Vector. The transcript summary is not 
accepted. Please note that no more than 30 in-service credits 
may be used for lane advancement during each employee’s 
lifetime career with Boston Public Schools. 


Page 6:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 6 of 12 
 
Continuing Education Units (CEUs) 
CEUs, also known as contact hours, are accepted at the rate of 15 
contact hours for 1 graduate credit, not to exceed 30 graduate 
credits. Please note that .1 CEU is the equivalent of 1 contact hour. 
This applies to nurses, speech and language pathologists, school 
psychologists, social workers, adjustment counselors, guidance 
counselors, occupational and physical therapists, vision teachers, 
and lead sign language interpreters only. CEUs are only accepted 
from approved CEU providers. The Boston Public Schools is not 
an approved CEU provider. 
Professional Development Points (PDPs) 
Although professional development points may be awarded for 
the completion of in-service courses, they are not applicable for 
salary lane advancement. PDPs are most used as evidence 
toward maintaining professional licensure. 
3. SALARY STEPS 
Salary step increases are automatically awarded based on the 
date specified in the applicable collective bargaining agreement. 
An employee who believes that they are being compensated on 
an incorrect step of the salary schedule should submit a PS-03 to 
the Office of Human Capital, as follows: 
 
 


Page 7:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 7 of 12 
 
• In the “Pay Adjustment” category, place a checkmark in the 
salary step block and specify the salary step requested. 
• Include a brief explanation for the request in the “Additional 
Explanation” section. 
• Sign and date the “Originator’s signature/date” block. 
Salary Steps as Related to Inside and Outside Service 
There is no longer a cap on the amount of Inside Service credits 
available for salary step adjustments/placement. Instead, the 
credit is based on prior eligible years of service. To qualify, an 
employee must have worked a minimum of 120 days in a 
qualifying academic year. 
A maximum of three years is awarded for an outside service 
salary step adjustment. To qualify, an employee must provide 
original documentation from a previous employer, specifically 
certifying the named employee has completed a minimum of 160 
days in the appropriate licensed capacity for each year. 
Individuals should not knowingly falsify information and should 
understand that applications are signed under the pains and 
penalties of perjury. 
As salary lane and salary step advancements are contractual 
entitlements, employees should forward these PS-03 requests 
directly to the Office of Human Capital.  No further signatures are 
necessary. 
 
 


Page 8:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 8 of 12 
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
May 31 
Academic year deadline for salary lane changes 
to be processed effective in the same year. 
June, July & 
August 
Submissions effective for the start of the next 
school year. 
September 30 
 
Deadline for submitting salary lane changes to 
be processed retroactively to September 1. 
 
4. NATIONAL BOARD-CERTIFIED TEACHERS 
When you achieve or renew National Board Certification, please 
submit the official notification letter and a PS03 Form.  The Office 
of Human Capital will review and verify the candidate's successful 
completion of board certification, inception and expiration dates 
via the NBPTS website.  The National Board differential is 
effective on the 1st of the month following an eligible 
submission.  Recertifications will be effective on the renewal date 
as long as the request is received prior to the expiration date.  If 
recertification received after the original expiration date the 
renewal will be dated for the first of the month following receipt.  
 
 
 


Page 9:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 9 of 12 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Employee Services 
Department: 
Office of Human Capital 
Mailing Address: Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
employeeservices@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 


Page 10:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 10 of 12 
 
APPENDIX A 
Academic Ladder Credits: Frequently Asked Questions 
• What is an Academic Ladder Credit (ALC), and how does it 
differ from an in-service credit? 
An Academic Ladder Credit, also known as ALC, is a new 
“credit” for academic lane advancement. ALCs are equal in 
value to in-service credits, with no cap on the amount one 
can earn.  ALCs require approximately 12 hours of “seat time” 
per credit, but credit is not awarded until the educator 
submits a final product demonstrating successful 
implementation of a specific instructional practice.  
• What do I need to do to earn ALCs? 
ALCs are earned by demonstrating competence in the 
practices learned in the course. While courses are 
approximately 12 hours of instruction (in person or online), 
credits are not awarded simply for attendance and 
participation. Each ALC course will have a clearly articulated 
target competency and a range of options for 
demonstrating it through artifacts or reflections.  
• What kinds of options might be available for 
demonstrating competencies? 
Each course will be different, but options include: lesson or 
unit plans, videos, student work analyses, reflections, or 
some combination of these. 
• Who determines whether I have demonstrated a 
competency? 
A team of BTU educators and central office administrators 


Page 11:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 11 of 12 
 
will review product submissions and award credits using a 
rubric made available to all course participants.  Those who 
do not earn credits on their first submission will receive 
feedback and an opportunity to resubmit.  
• Am I eligible to take any ALC course I want? 
While any educator is technically able to apply for any ALC 
course, because earning an ALC requires demonstrating 
competence in a skill, it will be difficult to complete courses 
that are not relevant to your context. OHC or APL reserves 
the right to refuse admittance to those educators for whom 
the content may not be relevant.  
• Is there a limit to the number of ALCs I can receive in a year 
or over my career? 
No. ALCs are not subject to the same cap as in-service 
credits. 
• Can you use ALCs in combination with graduate credits, 
etc. towards advancement? 
Yes. Employees may use combinations of graduate credits, 
in-service credits and ALCs for lane advancement. However, 
a teacher must possess a master’s degree to advance to the 
master’s lanes and must possess a doctorate degree to 
advance to the doctorate lane. 
• How do I submit my ALC credits to the Office of Human 
Capital for credit toward lane advancement? 
Employees should only submit ALC credits/degrees when 
applying for salary lane advancement. When doing so, 
employees should submit the actual ALC completion 


Page 12:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 12 of 12 
 
certificate from TeachPoint, along with any other graduate 
or in-service credits, and a completed PS03 to the Office of 
Human Capital (4th Floor, Bolling Building). Only ALCs 
approved by the Boston Public Schools will be awarded 
credit for salary. 
• Are ALC courses portable outside BPS? 
No. 
• Are non-BTU members eligible to earn ALCs? 
While non-BTU members may participate in ALC courses, 
only BTU members are eligible to receive credits. 
• Are paraprofessionals eligible to receive ALCs? 
Yes. Please note that because earning an ALC requires 
demonstrating competence in a skill, it will be difficult to 
complete courses that are not relevant to your role or 
context. OHC or APL reserves the right to refuse admittance 
to those educators for whom the content may not be 
relevant. 
• I have an idea for an ALC course. How can I make that 
happen? 
Contact the Office of Academics and Professional Learning. 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PM03 
Version 01 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF MEMBERS OF THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE GUILD 
The following sets forth the philosophy, roles, responsibilities, and 
procedures applicable to the evaluation process for members of 
the Administrative Guild. 
I. COVERAGE 
The contract between the School Committee and the 
Administrative Guild provides for both annual and interim 
evaluations of the performance of all employees represented by 
the Guild. The evaluation process relates to the duties and 
responsibilities of the employee’s position, as set forth in the 
employee’s job description. 
The job descriptions are general in nature and are not intended 
to change any employee’s existing responsibilities. The format of 
the job descriptions allows supervisors to determine the specific 
job duties associated with the position’s classification. 
The supervisor should obtain a copy of the appropriate job 
description and provide it to each employee under their 
jurisdiction. The supervisor should also communicate clearly to 
the employee the specific duties associated with the position as 
well as any additional information pertaining to the position. 
Members of the Administrative Guild can also contact their OHC 
Staffing Manager to access job descriptions. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 2 of 21 
 
II. PHILOSOPHY 
The Boston Public Schools recognizes that the quality of 
educational service depends upon the professional performance 
and total job effectiveness of all employees. Since clerical and 
technical employees can and should be held accountable for the 
quality of their performance, a just and effective process for 
evaluating that performance is essential. True performance 
evaluation involves an analysis of an employee's strengths and 
weaknesses, resulting in diagnoses and prescriptions that lead to 
the desired improvement of skills and performance. 
All clerical and technical employees will be evaluated using the 
diagnostic-prescriptive approach, and the procedures and forms 
developed for the implementation of this approach. 
A diagnostic-prescriptive evaluation program is positively 
directed and encourages employees to maximize their unique 
strengths and skills. It encourages employees to participate in 
the evaluation of their own performance and to help set 
objectives for self-improvement. The performance evaluation 
process, however, is not intended to be a substitute for the day-
to-day communication with and supervision of employees. 
An effective performance evaluation program is one that is 
continuous rather than periodic and organized to: 
● develop a clear understanding of the goals of the 
department or school; 
● assist employees in addressing more effectively the needs 
of each school or department; and 
● encourage cooperative staff relations through mutual trust 
and respect for each employee's role. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 3 of 21 
 
III. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
Heads of school, principals, and other administrative heads have 
chief responsibility for the evaluation of all staff in their 
responsibility centers. Performance evaluations must be 
conducted by the employee's most immediate supervisor who is 
not a member of the Guild bargaining unit. 
A supervisor’s failure to address the job performance problems of 
their staff through the performance evaluation process 
represents unacceptable performance for which the supervisor 
will be held accountable. 
Further, a supervisor will also be performing unsatisfactorily if an 
underperforming staff member is given a satisfactory rating and 
then encouraged to transfer to another school or department. A 
supervisor who does this will be held accountable as part of their 
performance evaluation. 
IV. DIAGNOSIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
The performance evaluation process should provide each 
employee with an appraisal of their strengths and identify areas 
in need of improvement. The employee will be evaluated on each 
standard within the various categories. There are four possible 
ratings: 
 
E – EXEMPLARY: 
The employee’s performance of the duties and 
responsibilities of their position exceeds 
expectations. 
P – PROFICIENT: 
The employee’s performance of the duties and 
responsibilities of their position meets 
expectations. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 4 of 21 
 
N – NEEDS 
IMPROVEMENT: 
The employee’s performance of the duties and 
responsibilities of their position needs 
improvement. 
U – UNSATISFACTORY: 
The employee has failed to meet expectations 
and their performance of the duties and 
responsibilities of their position needs 
improvement. 
Every interim and annual evaluation must result in a mark for 
each appropriate item on the evaluation form. In any area where 
the supervisor indicates a need for improvement, they will 
provide the employee with a written prescription within the 
evaluation document. The diagnosis and subsequent 
prescription should be fully descriptive and instructive, 
suggesting specific remedies or recommendations for adoption 
by the employee. The employee may suggest additional or 
alternative prescriptions. 
V. PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT PROCESS 
The performance of employees represented by the Guild 
bargaining unit is evaluated annually. The evaluation year is from 
July 1 to June 30 for each employee. 
Performance evaluation activities may include, but are not 
limited to, preliminary planning conferences, daily observations, 
notations, formal interim evaluations, follow-up conferences, and 
recommendations to the employee by the evaluator. 
During the entire evaluation process, continuous administrative 
assistance, support, and encouragement should be extended to 
assist the employee in meeting established objectives. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 5 of 21 
 
STEP 1 – PRELIMINARY PROCEDURES 
At the beginning of each evaluation year, the head of school, 
principal, or other administrative head should meet with their 
supervisory staff to orient them to the performance evaluation 
process and to their roles and responsibilities within that process 
for the upcoming year. Guild members will be evaluated by their 
most direct supervisor or designee who is not a member of the 
Guild bargaining unit. 
For all new employees or after a change in supervision, the 
evaluator must meet with the employee no later than 30 days 
after the start of the evaluation year to discuss and explain the 
evaluation process, the evaluation instrument, and to clarify the 
responsibilities and objectives of the position. 
The evaluator and the Guild member will sign the evaluation 
instrument indicating the date of such meeting. 
STEP 2 – PREPARE DIAGNOSIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS (AS 
NEEDED) 
If at any time, including at the interim evaluation meeting (see 
step 3), a supervisor finds that an employee needs major 
improvement in their job performance or in accomplishing any 
goal, the supervisor will prepare a written diagnosis of the 
situation, recommendations for improvement, and will share this 
feedback with the employee within a reasonable amount of time. 
STEP 3 – INTERIM EVALUATION PROCEDURES 
All new employees or employees under new supervision should 
receive an interim evaluation no later than November 15, if 
reasonably possible. All other employees will be evaluated a 
minimum of one time during the school year. However, to 
receive a rating of “Unsatisfactory” in any category on an annual 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 6 of 21 
 
evaluation, an interim evaluation must have been previously 
conducted. 
If an interim evaluation includes a rating(s) of Unsatisfactory 
and/or Needs Improvement in any category, then the supervisor 
will communicate in writing the reasons for the rating(s) of 
Unsatisfactory and/or Needs Improvement within the evaluation 
form and provide prescriptions for improvement. A follow-up 
evaluation or evaluations for an interim overall unsatisfactory 
evaluation must be done after a minimum of 20 school days and 
no later than 50 school days from the last evaluation during 
which a member is present. All initial “Unsatisfactory” interim 
evaluations should have a follow-up evaluation no less than 20 
school days during which the employee is present. 
The same form is used for interim and annual evaluations. 
STEP 4 – POST INTERIM MEETING EVALUATION CONFERENCE 
Within ten (10) working days in which the employee is present 
following the completion of an interim evaluation document, the 
evaluator will meet with the employee to discuss the evaluation. 
During this conference, the evaluation and a copy of it will be 
provided to the employee, who will sign both the original and the 
copy to indicate that they have seen and acknowledged it, but 
not to indicate agreement or disagreement with its contents. The 
supervisor must retain the signed copy. The employee has a right 
to attach a written response to the evaluation. 
If an employee receives a mark of Needs Improvement or 
Unsatisfactory on any item on their performance evaluation form, 
the principal, head of school, or other administrative head must 
immediately submit this evaluation form to the Office of Human 
Resources. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 7 of 21 
 
Interim evaluations will not be placed in the employee’s 
permanent file. 
STEP 5 – ANNUAL EVALUATION PROCEDURES 
Annual evaluations must be completed no later than June 1 of 
each year. 
If an evaluation includes a rating(s) of Unsatisfactory and/or 
Needs Improvement in any category, then the supervisor will 
communicate in writing the reasons for the rating(s) of 
Unsatisfactory and/or Needs Improvement within the evaluation 
form and provide prescriptions for improvement. However, to 
receive a rating of “Unsatisfactory” in any category on an annual 
evaluation, an interim evaluation must have been previously 
conducted. If an employee received a Needs Improvement or 
Unsatisfactory rating on any item on the form, the Principal, 
Head of School, other Administrative Head must immediately 
submit this evaluation form to The Office of Human Resources. 
STEP 6 – POST ANNUAL EVALUATION CONFERENCE 
Within ten (10) working days in which the employee is present 
following the completion of any evaluation document, the 
evaluator will meet with the employee to discuss the evaluation. 
During this conference, the evaluation and a copy of it will be 
provided to the employee, who will sign both the original and the 
copy to indicate that they have seen and acknowledged it, but 
not to indicate agreement or disagreement with its contents. The 
employee has the right to attach a written response to the 
evaluation form. 
If an employee receives an annual overall Unsatisfactory 
evaluation, the supervisor may initiate termination by 
recommending to the Superintendent that such employee be 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 8 of 21 
 
terminated. 
STEP 7 – SUBMIT PERFORMANCE EVALUATION FORMS TO THE 
OFFICE OF HUMAN RESOURCES 
At the end of each evaluation year, the principal, head of school, 
or other administrative head should retain the copies of all 
evaluations and send/deliver the originals of all evaluations to the 
Office of Human Resources front desk. If the performance 
evaluation is overall Unsatisfactory, a copy should also be sent to 
the director of evaluation and performance management, Office 
of Human Resources. 
Note: An employee with an “Unsatisfactory” performance 
evaluation has no bidding rights until that employee receives a 
subsequent “satisfactory” performance evaluation. For the 
purposes of this section, an “Unsatisfactory” evaluation means an 
unsatisfactory rating in any two areas on an interim or annual 
evaluation. 
VI. PROCEDURES FOR DISCIPLINE 
If a principal, head of school, or other administrative head 
determines that an employee has committed an infraction of 
work rules such as excessive tardiness, absences, etc., the 
supervisor should follow the procedures outlined in the 
Superintendent's Circular on Employee Discipline Procedures. 
Additionally, the supervisor should consider the infraction in 
evaluating the employee's overall performance.  
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 9 of 21 
 
VII. FORMS 
The Performance Evaluation Form for Members of the 
Administrative Guild is attached. 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
DATE 
ACTIVITY 
Within the first 30 days 
of Evaluation Year 
For new employees/employees under 
new supervision only: Review job 
description and evaluation instrument. 
Sign cover page to acknowledge 
meeting. 
No later than 
November 15 
For new employees/employees under 
new supervision only: Complete first 
Interim Evaluation 
June 15 
Deadline to send signed, original 
copies of evaluations to:  
Bruce C. Bolling Municipal Building 
Office of Human Resources 
Attn: OHC Front Desk 
2300 Washington Street, 4th floor 
Roxbury, Massachusetts 02119 
July 1 to June 30 
The evaluation year of an 
Administrative Guild employee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 10 of 21 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Evaluation and Performance 
Management 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Boston, MA 
02119 
Email: 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org 
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
 
Page 11 of 21 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS ADMINISTRATIVE GUILD 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION FORM 
Name: _________________________________Employee ID: ____________  
Current Position and Grade: ___________________ Date: ____________  
Permanent Position and Grade: __________________________________  
Department/School: _____________________________________________  
Evaluator: ________________________________________________________  
Check One:  Interim Evaluation: ☐         Annual Evaluation: ☐ 
Evaluator's Signature: _________________________ Date: 
_____________ 
Employee's Signature: _________________________ Date: ____________ 
The employee's signature indicates that they have seen and 
discussed the evaluation. It does not denote agreement with it. 
Evaluator's Supervisor  
Signature: ____________________________________ Date: _____________ 
Initial Pre-Evaluation Conference: 
 Evaluator’s Signature:__________________________Date:____________ 
 
Employee’s Signature___________________________Date: 
   
 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 12 of 21 
 
Review the employee’s job description and then complete the 
form.  The following scale will be used for ranking performance: 
E - EXEMPLARY 
The employee’s performance of the 
duties and responsibilities of their 
position exceeds expectations. 
P - PROFICIENT 
The employee’s performance of the 
duties and responsibilities of their 
position meets expectations. 
N - NEEDS 
IMPROVEMENT 
The employee’s performance of the 
duties and responsibilities of their 
position needs improvement. 
U - UNSATISFACTORY 
The employee has failed to meet 
expectations and their performance of 
the duties and responsibilities of their 
position needs improvement. 
The evaluator will circle the letter that applies, or if the form is 
being completed electronically, the evaluator should underline or 
bold the letter that applies.  Any rating of "U" or “N” must be 
accompanied by a supporting diagnosis and prescription.  The 
evaluator may add comments to ratings of "P" and "E" at their 
discretion.  
 
 
 
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 13 of 21 
 
Performance Ratings (see Performance Standards descriptions 
below): 
(Place an X in the appropriate box for each 
standard and overall) 
E 
P 
N 
U 
Standard I: Job Functions 
 
 
 
 
Standard II: Collaboration and Initiative 
 
 
 
 
Standard III: Communication 
 
 
 
 
Standard IV: Professionalism and Growth 
 
 
 
 
Overall Rating 
 
 
 
 
 
Supervisor's Comments 
1. How long has this employee been under your supervision?  
 
2. General comments, significant other achievements, 
appraisal of potentialities. 
 
 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 14 of 21 
 
3. This diagnosis and prescription section must be completed 
for each category evaluated as U – Unsatisfactory.  Identify 
the item number, the observable need for improvement, the 
recommendation, and the target date for improvement. 
 
 
 
 
 
Employee's Comments: 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
 
Page 15 of 21 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE GUILD PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
Standard I: Job Functions. The employee effectively supports the district's and department/school’s 
mission through demonstrated job-specific skills, knowledge, and quality of work after proper 
instruction. 
Indicators 
Unsatisfactory 
Needs 
Improvement 
Proficient 
Exemplary 
I-A. Skills and 
knowledge 
Demonstrates a 
critical lack of 
necessary skills 
and knowledge 
to perform one's 
own job, 
including the 
ability to 
effectively use 
relevant, position 
specific 
technology. 
Demonstrates 
some, but not all, of 
the necessary skills 
and knowledge to 
perform the 
employee's own job, 
including the ability 
to effectively use 
relevant position 
specific technology. 
Has the necessary 
technical skills and 
knowledge to 
perform the 
employee's own job, 
including the ability 
to effectively use 
relevant position 
specific technology. 
Demonstrates 
proficiency AND 
serves as a resource 
for other employees 
in similar or related 
positions. 
 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 16 of 21 
 
I-B. Quality of 
Work 
Demonstrates 
effectiveness at 
few to none of 
the 
responsibilities 
defined in the 
employee's job 
description. 
Demonstrates 
effectiveness at 
some, but not all, of 
the responsibilities 
defined in the 
employee's job 
description. 
Accurately, 
competently, and in a 
timely manner 
performs assigned 
tasks as set forth in 
the job description. 
Demonstrates 
proficiency AND 
makes significant or 
noteworthy 
contributions 
towards helping 
accomplish the 
school/department 
goals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 17 of 21 
 
Standard II: Collaboration and Initiative. The employee supports the district's and the 
department/school’s mission and goals by cultivating a shared vision, modeling responsibility, 
accountability, and cooperation. 
Indicators 
Unsatisfactory 
Needs 
Improvement 
Proficient 
Exemplary 
II-A. 
Teamwork 
Demonstrates a 
pattern of refusal 
to support 
supervisor and 
others as 
identified in the 
job description. 
Demonstrates 
limited accuracy 
and support of 
supervisor and 
others as identified 
in the job 
description when 
asked. 
Establishes and 
maintains 
relationships that 
promote the 
advancement of 
common goals by 
providing accurate 
and reliable support. 
Demonstrates 
proficiency 
AND takes initiative 
to identify and act 
upon new 
opportunities to 
support 
school/department 
missions. 
II-B. 
Motivation and 
Initiative 
Requires direct 
intervention and 
continual 
oversight from 
supervisor to 
Requires increased 
oversight or 
reminders for 
routine duties 
despite receiving 
Accomplishes work 
after proper 
instruction; seeks 
clarification when 
needed performs 
Demonstrates 
proficiency AND 
recommends 
solutions, as well as 
takes initiative on 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 18 of 21 
 
perform the 
duties outlined 
in job 
description. 
standard support. 
tasks in anticipation 
of or extraneous to 
normal 
responsibilities, 
effectively copes with 
the unexpected. 
starting new tasks 
and projects, as 
appropriate, to 
support district and 
school/department 
goals. 
 
Standard III: Communication. Communicates effectively, professionally and with a customer-focused 
approach; speaking or writing originated by a Guild member. Cultural Proficiency: Actively creates 
and maintains an environment in which students and staff of diverse backgrounds, identities, 
strengths, and challenges are respected 
Indicators 
Unsatisfactory 
Needs 
Improvement 
Proficient 
Exemplary 
III-A. Effective 
Written and 
Oral 
Communicatio
n 
Demonstrates a 
pattern of 
ineffectual 
written, oral, and 
interpersonal 
communication. 
Written, oral and 
interpersonal 
communication 
occasionally lacks 
clarity, timeliness, 
courtesy, or 
All written, oral, and 
interpersonal 
communication 
produced is accurate, 
clear, concise, 
courteous, and timely. 
Demonstrates 
proficiency AND 
models effective 
public demeanor 
and/or participation 
skills. 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 19 of 21 
 
precision. 
III-B. 
Culturally 
Proficient 
Communicatio
n 
Demonstrates a 
pattern of failure 
to ensure 
communications 
are always 
respectful and 
demonstrate 
understanding of 
and sensitivity to 
cultural and 
other 
differences. 
Demonstrates 
inconsistency in 
ensuring all 
communication is 
respectful and 
demonstrates an 
understanding and 
sensitivity to 
cultural and other 
differences. 
Ensures that all 
communication is 
consistently 
respectful and 
demonstrates an 
understanding of and 
sensitivity to different 
languages, cultures 
and values 
represented. 
Demonstrates 
proficiency AND 
serves as a 
model/resource for 
staff regarding 
culturally proficient 
communication. 
 
 
 
 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 20 of 21 
 
Standard IV: Professionalism and Growth. The employee's conduct reflects good judgment and high 
standards of performance, behavior, and a willingness to grow through ongoing professional 
learning. 
Indicators 
Unsatisfactory 
Needs 
Improvement 
Proficient 
Exemplary 
IV-A. 
Professional 
Judgment 
Demonstrates 
poor judgment 
and/or discloses 
confidential 
information 
inappropriately. 
Occasionally 
demonstrates 
questionable 
judgment and 
sharing of 
confidential 
information. 
Demonstrates sound 
judgment reflecting 
integrity, honesty, 
fairness, and 
trustworthiness and 
protects 
confidentiality 
appropriately. 
Demonstrates 
proficiency AND 
serves as a model for 
others regarding 
professional 
judgment. 
IV-B. 
Attendance 
and 
Punctuality 
Demonstrates a 
pattern of 
problematic 
behavior 
regarding 
punctuality, 
Exhibits some 
notable challenges 
with punctuality, 
attendance, or 
giving notice of 
time off. 
Is punctual; follows 
attendance policy 
notice requirements. 
Demonstrates 
proficiency AND 
ensures that vacation 
and personal leave is 
taken at a time that 
minimally impacts 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM03 
Page 21 of 21 
 
attendance or 
giving notice of 
time off. 
the functioning of 
the department 
and/or school. 
IV-C. 
Feedback and 
Growth 
Demonstrates 
resistance to 
feedback related 
to performance 
and/or fails to 
use feedback to 
improve 
performance. 
Has notable 
difficulty receiving 
feedback related to 
performance and/or 
using feedback to 
improve 
performance. 
Responds receptively 
and constructively to 
feedback related to 
performance and 
uses feedback to 
improve 
performance. 
Demonstrates 
proficiency AND 
models the use of 
feedback to 
personally improve. 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
HRS-PP20 
Version 01 
 
 
 
CHANGES IN PAY FREQUENCY FOR 
PARAPROFESSIONALS AND COMMUNITY FIELD 
COORDINATORS  
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Pursuant to the Memorandum of Agreement between the School 
Committee of the City of Boston and The Boston Teachers Union, 
Local 66, AFT, AFL-CIO (‘Union’), Article III, Compensation and 
Benefits Section A: “Add – If 200 paraprofessionals choose the 
option, a paraprofessional shall have the option of being paid 
biweekly over 26 paychecks”.   
1. Paraprofessionals and community field coordinators may 
elect to be paid biweekly over 26 paychecks. 
2. An employee must be active or on paid leave at the 
beginning of the school year.   
3. Applications can be submitted to the Payroll Unit via fax to 
617-635-9003, via Google form 
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfG_oD8pq-
i9VuJS2PRIv-2bAZjefxoUxrgxox7NZhcYxguOw/viewform, or 
US postal service to 2300 Washington Street, Roxbury MA 
02119, Attn: Payroll, only during the open enrollment period 
which begins on April 1 and ends on June 1.   
4. Applicants who wish to change their pay frequency from 10 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP20 
September 1, 2023 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
 
months to 12 months or 12 months to 10 months must notify 
Payroll by submitting the Para Pay Frequency application or 
completing the Google form prior to the June 1 deadline to 
be effective September of the next school year. 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
April 1 
Para pay frequency open enrollment period begins.  
June 1 
Para pay frequency open enrollment period closes.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Department: 
Office of Human Capital 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Fax: 
617-635-9003 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP20 
September 1, 2023 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
APPLICATION FOR CHANGE IN PAY FREQUENCY FOR ALL 
PARAPROFESSIONALS & COMMUNITY FIELD COORDINATORS 
  Change from 21 to 26 payments (paid 12 months): 
I am electing to change my paycheck frequency to 26 
payments.  I understand that this request cannot be reversed 
until the next school year. 
  Change from 26 to 21 payments (paid 10 months): 
I am electing to change my paycheck frequency to 21 
payments.  I understand that this request cannot be reversed 
until the next school year. 
Name:   ___________________________________________________________  
Employee I.D.: ____________________________________________________  
School/Department: ______________________________________________  
Signature:  _______________________________________________________  
Date: __________________________ 
Please submit your completed form on or before June 1.  The 
change will become effective in September of the new school 
year.  If you have any questions regarding this matter, please 
contact the Office of Human Capital at 617-635-9600. 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PM09 
Version 01 
 
CLUSTER SUBSTITUTE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
Cluster Substitute Teachers are: 
Those teachers who are assigned to a school for a full year to 
rotate into the various teacher absence positions in the school, as 
needed, on a daily basis. 
A cluster substitute teacher shall be given two (2) overall 
performance evaluations for the academic year by the 
appropriate building administrator or their designee outside of 
the bargaining unit. The evaluation instrument for use with 
Cluster Substitutes is attached to this Circular. 
EVALUATION CRITERIA (RATING OPTIONS: YES, NO, N/A) 
1. Teaching Ability: Conveys clear and concise instruction. 
Focuses on student achievement and content meaningful to 
students. Accommodates the varied needs of students. 
2. Classroom Management: Accountable for classroom 
environment and culture. Ability to effectively deal with 
negative student behavior. Focused and productive when 
faced with challenges and a willingness to adapt classroom 
instruction to meet the need/culture of the school. 
3. School Fit: Respects the opinion of others. Creates a positive 
relationship with administrators, teachers, school staff and 
students. Demonstrates interest and skills that match the 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM09 
Page 2 of 5 
 
school’s culture and needs. Interacts appropriately with 
supervisors, colleagues, parents, and students. 
4. Summary Question: “Would you use this substitute teacher at 
your school going forward?” (“Yes” constitutes a rating of 
“Meets Expectations.”) 
The evaluator may provide written comments in addition to 
ratings. 
Date 
Activity 
January 15 (recommended) 
Meet with cluster substitute teachers to discuss 
performance. Completion of evaluation form. 
May 15 
Complete and submit final evaluation form of all Cluster 
Substitutes within the school. 
June 1 
Deadline for signed, original copies of evaluation form 
(below/attached) to be submitted to:  
Bruce C. Bolling Municipal Building 
Office of Human Resources (Attn: Performance 
Management Team) 
2300 Washington Street, 4th floor 
Roxbury, MA 02119 
 
 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM09 
Page 3 of 5 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Director of Evaluation and Performance Management 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
 
 
Email: 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org 
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM09 
Page 4 of 5 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS  
SUBSTITUTE MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT EVALUATION FORM 
Substitute Name  
 
BPS ID: ________________ 
School Name: ________________________________Date: 
 
 
Evaluator Name: ____________________________ Title: 
 
 
SUMMARY QUESTION: Would you use this substitute teacher at 
your school going forward?    ◻ Yes           ◻ No 
(YES constitutes a rating of “Meets Expectations”) 
TEACHING ABILITY: Demonstrates an appropriate knowledge of 
content. 
Conveys ideas and Information clearly. 
Yes / No / NA 
Makes content meaningful to students. 
Yes / No / NA 
Addresses the multiple and varied needs of  
classroom students. 
Yes / No / NA 
Focuses on achieving results with students. 
Yes / No / NA 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM09 
Page 5 of 5 
 
CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT: Demonstrates ability to deal 
effectively with negative student behavior. 
Assumes accountability for classroom environment  
and culture. 
Yes / No / NA 
Demonstrates ability to deal effectively with  
negative student behavior. 
Yes / No / NA 
Remains productive and focused when faced  
with challenges. 
Yes / No / NA 
Displays a willingness to adapt classroom  
management style to meet a particular need/ 
culture of school. 
Yes / No / NA 
SCHOOL FIT: Demonstrates skills and needs for development 
that can be a good fit for the school. 
Respects the opinion of others. 
Yes / No / NA 
Create positive relationships with administrators,  
teachers, school staff and students. 
Yes / No / NA 
Demonstrates interest and skills that match the  
school’s culture and needs. 
Yes / No / NA 
Interacts appropriately with supervisors,  
colleagues, parents, and students. 
Yes / No / NA 
COMMENTS: 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
HRS-PP08 
Version 01 
 
INCENTIVE FOR EARLY NOTIFICATION OF TERMINATION 
FOR BOSTON TEACHERS UNION — TEACHERS UNIT  
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
To assist hiring for the 2024-2025 school year, the Boston Public 
Schools is offering a one-time incentive for early notification of 
termination to members of the BTU Teachers Union. 
1. An individual must be a permanent BTU teacher, have a 
minimum of ten (10) years of continuous service in the 
Boston Public Schools, and must meet the minimum age 
requirement of fifty-five (55) years.  
2. Eligible employees presently on paid or unpaid leave of 
absence can apply by completing the online application for 
Incentive for Early Notification of Termination and 
submitting it to the Office of Human Resources (application 
link located below). 
3. A Separation Agreement must be completed in order for the 
Office of Human Resources to accept the application in full. 
Once the application is accepted in full, it is binding on both 
parties and irrevocable.  
4. Applicants understand that the termination must be 
effective between June 30, 2025 and August 31, 2025. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP08 
Page 2 of 3 
 
5. Applicants will be ineligible for hire into full-time positions 
at Boston Public Schools for the school year 2024-2025. 
6. Applicants further understand that: 
a. They will not be eligible for unemployment 
compensation, and 
b. Acceptance of this incentive shall not affect any rights 
of a member under the Teacher Retirement Law. 
7. Applications must be filed with the Office of Human 
Resources by the close of business on Friday, January 10, 
2025. If accepted, a one-time payment of $1,500 will be 
made by Friday, February 28, 2025. 
8. Individuals planning to retire must also file an “Intent to 
Retire” form with the City of Boston Retirement Board. The 
incentive application does not replace this process. Please 
note that pursuant to Retirement Board policy, an individual 
cannot file an “Intent to Retire” more than forty-five (45) 
days before the retirement date.   
9. BTU/Teachers Unit employees wishing to apply for this 
incentive for early notification of termination must submit 
the following Google form to the Office of Human 
Resources: 
Application for Incentive for Early Notification of Termination  
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Application Deadline 
Payment 
Friday, January 10 
Friday, February 28 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP08 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Employee Information 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
employeeinformation@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
HRS- L03 
Version 01 
 
 
LICENSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR PRINCIPALS/HEADS 
OF SCHOOL AND BASAS EMPLOYEES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
All principals and heads of school as well as most BASAS 
employees are required to hold one of five administrative licenses 
issued by the State of Massachusetts Department of Elementary 
and Secondary Education (DESE).   
TYPES OF ADMINISTRATOR LICENSES 
The DESE issues the following five administrator licenses:  
• Superintendent/Assistant Superintendent 
• Principal/Assistant Principal 
• Supervisor/Director 
• Special Education Administrator 
• School Business Administrator 
REQUIREMENTS BY ADMINISTRATOR POSITION 
The BPS positions/titles below require the following licenses in 
the appropriate grade level(s):   
 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L03 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
 
BPS Position/Title 
Required License 
Principal / Head of School 
Principal/Assistant Principal 
Assistant Principal / Head of 
School 
Principal/Assistant Principal 
Academy Director 
Supervisor/Director OR 
Principal/Assistant Principal 
Academy Leader 
Supervisor/Director OR 
Principal/Assistant Principal 
Director of Instruction 
Supervisor/Director OR 
Principal/Assistant Principal 
Director of Alternative 
Education 
Supervisor/Director OR 
Principal/Assistant Principal 
Small Learning Community 
Leader 
Supervisor/Director OR 
Principal/Assistant Principal 
Director of Curriculum, 
Assessment and Placement 
Supervisor/Director OR 
Principal/Assistant Principal 
Senior Curriculum Access 
Specialist 
Special Education Administrator 
license OR Moderate/Severe 
Disabilities teaching license in 
combination with Principal/ 
Assistant Principal license. 
Senior Curriculum Manager 
Principal/Assistant Principal OR 
Supervisor/Director OR Special 
Education Administrator license 
Senior Program Director 
Principal/Assistant Principal OR 
Supervisor/Director OR Special 
Education Administrator license 
Program Director 
Principal/Assistant Principal OR 
Supervisor/Director OR Special 
Education Administrator license 
Some BASAS classifications may require licensure depending 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L03 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
 
upon the types of duties performed.  If a BASAS member is 
responsible for the “Planning, Implementing, or Developing of 
Curriculum and Instruction” (for 50% or more of their time), they 
must hold an administrator license.  Additionally, if the BASAS 
administrator is responsible for the “Evaluation of Employees,'' 
they must hold an administrator license. 
If they are responsible for the planning, implementing, or 
developing of Curriculum and Instruction, or the evaluation of 
employees, the following BPS employees must hold these 
licenses: 
BPS Position/Title 
Required License 
Senior Coordinator 
Principal/Assistant Principal or 
Supervisor/Director or Special 
Education Administrator license  
Coordinator 
Junior Coordinator 
Director 
Assistant Director 
Bilingual Program Specialist 
Senior Program Coordinator 
MEETING MASSACHUSETTS STATE LICENSURE REQUIREMENTS 
The following information outlines general guidelines that 
principals, heads of school, and relevant BASAS employees 
should follow to meet Massachusetts state licensure 
requirements.  The DESE will determine individual licensure 
requirements upon review of the administrator’s application. 
1. Pass the Massachusetts Test for Educator Licensure (MTEL) 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L03 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
 
in Communication and Literacy Skills.  To register for the 
MTEL, go to: http://www.doe.mass.edu/mtel/. 
2. Complete the licensure requirements for the administrator 
role sought through one of the available routes: 
a. Complete an Approved Program of Study.  DESE 
approves educator preparation programs sponsored by 
higher education, professional associations, 
collaboratives, school districts, charter schools, and 
other organizations.  Approved programs are designed 
to meet the requirements for a specific administrator 
license.  The DESE website, 
http://www.doe.mass.edu/edprep, contains a list of 
approved administrator preparation programs. 
b. Complete an Administrative 
Apprenticeship/Internship. This route to licensure is 
primarily a field-based experience requiring a 
minimum of 300-500 hours depending on the license 
being pursued in the role of the license sought. 
Candidates completing this route must be guided by a 
trained mentor (who has held a professional license in 
the same role for at least three years) and participate in 
seminars, workshops, and other opportunities that will 
assist the candidates in adequately addressing the 
Professional Standards for Administrators.  
c. Be recommended for licensure through the Panel 
Review process.  This route is only available for 
administrator licensure candidates who have specific 
prerequisite experiences and for all superintendent 
candidates. 
3. Apply for licensure and make payment through the online 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L03 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
 
process: (https://www.doe.mass.edu/licensure/apply-check-
status-license.html). 
4. Submit the following supporting documentation and 
information to the DESE:  
a. One of the following: 
i. Approved program endorsement 
ii. Administrative Apprenticeship/Internship 
Endorsement Form.  This form is accessible 
through the Guidelines for Administrator Routes 
to Initial Licensure: 
http://www.mass.gov/edu/docs/ese/educator-
effectiveness/licensing/panel-review-
administrator-routes.pdf  
b. A letter written on official letterhead by the 
superintendent/designee, principal, or previous 
employer that documents the candidate has 
completed three years of employment in the role of the 
current license or other required experience. 
c. Successful completion of the Performance Assessment 
for Initial License. Applicants for the Principal/Assistant 
Principal license are required to successfully complete 
the Performance Assessment for Initial Licensure 
(MA_PAL).  This requirement is currently under 
development for all other administrative licenses. 
Licensure can be granted to those who satisfy all other 
licensure requirements prior to this requirement 
becoming available. 
   
d. Official transcripts of undergraduate/graduate studies 
if required for specific license. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L03 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
 
 
More information about the requirements for the administrator 
licenses is available through the Guidelines for Administrator 
Routes to Initial Licensure:  
http://www.mass.gov/edu/docs/ese/educator-
effectiveness/licensing/panel-review-administrator-
routes.pdf  
PROCESS FOR REPORTING LICENSURE TO THE OFFICE OF 
HUMAN RESOURCES 
It is the responsibility of principals, heads of school, and relevant 
BASAS employees, as well as their supervisors, to ensure proper 
licensure is in place and recorded in the “BPS Licenses” section of 
PeopleSoft (found under “Workforce Development”) which is 
maintained by the Office of Human Resources via an electronic 
download from the Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education.  
PROCESS FOR LICENSURE RELATED VERIFICATIONS 
All educators and other employees seeking licensure related 
verifications and/or loan forgiveness must complete the BPS 
Educator Licensure-Related Verification Requests form.   
 
 
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L03 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
 
For more Information about this circular, contact: 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Fax: 
617-635-7956 
Email: 
employeeservices@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PP13A 
Version 01 
 
FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT AND SMALL 
NECESSITIES LEAVE ACT 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Eligible employees are entitled to take up to 12 weeks of leave for 
family or medical leave under federal law and up to 24 hours of 
leave for family obligations under state law during a fiscal year 
(July 1 through June 30). School-based employees who report to a 
principal/head of school (except custodians, cafeteria workers, 
and itinerants) may submit their leave requests via the Hub. 
FEDERAL FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT 
1. Eligibility 
Employees who have been employed in the Boston Public 
Schools for at least 12 months at the BPS and who have 
worked at least 1,250 hours in the prior 12-month period are 
eligible. 
2. Purpose 
● For incapacity due to pregnancy, prenatal medical care, 
or childbirth 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13A 
Page 2 of 11 
 
● To care for a son or daughter within the first 12 months 
after birth, adoption or placement for adoption or foster 
care  
● Because the employee is needed to care for a spouse, son, 
daughter, or parent who has a serious health condition. 
○ Son or daughter means a biological, adopted, or foster 
child, a stepchild, a legal ward, or a child of a person 
standing in loco parentis, who is either under age 18, or 
age 18 or older and incapable of self-care because of a 
mental or physical disability. Parent does not include 
in-laws. 
● Because of the employee's own serious health condition 
which makes the employee unable to perform their job. 
A serious health condition means an illness, injury, 
impairment or physical or mental condition that involves: 
○ a period of incapacity or treatment connected with 
inpatient care  
○ a period of incapacity requiring absence of more than 3 
calendar days from work or daily activities also 
involving continuing treatment by a health care 
provider 
○ any period of incapacity due to pregnancy or for 
prenatal care 
○ any period of incapacity due to a chronic serious health 
condition (e.g., asthma, diabetes, epilepsy) 
○ any period of incapacity that is permanent or long term 
due to a condition for which treatment may not be 
effective (e.g., Alzheimer’s, stroke, terminal diseases) 
○ a period of absence to receive multiple treatments for 
an injury or condition which would result in incapacity 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13A 
Page 3 of 11 
 
for more than three days if not treated (e.g., 
chemotherapy, physical therapy, dialysis). 
3. Length of Leave 
Subject to FMLA qualification, up to 12 weeks of leave may 
be taken in any fiscal year.  For qualifying exigencies arising 
out of the fact that the employee’s spouse, son, daughter, or 
parent is on active duty or call to active duty status as a 
member of the National Guard or Reserves in support of a 
contingency operation to permit a "spouse, son, daughter, 
parent, or next of kin" to take up to 26 work weeks of leave 
to care for a "member of the Armed Forces, including a 
member of the National Guard or Reserves, who is 
undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy, is 
otherwise in outpatient status, or is otherwise on temporary 
disability retired list, for a serious injury or illness." 
Qualifying exigencies include: 
● Issues arising from a covered military member’s short 
notice deployment (i.e., deployment on seven or less days 
of notice) for a period of seven days from the date of 
notification 
● Military events and related activities such as official 
ceremonies, programs, or events sponsored by the 
military or family support or assistance programs and 
informational briefings sponsored or promoted by the 
military, military service organizations, or the American 
Red Cross that are related to the active duty or call to 
active duty status of a covered military member; 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13A 
Page 4 of 11 
 
● Certain childcare and related activities arising from the 
active duty or call to active duty status of a covered 
military member, such as arranging for alternative 
childcare, providing childcare on a non-routine, urgent, 
immediate need basis, enrolling, or transferring a child in 
a new school or day care facility, and attending certain 
meetings at a school or a day care facility if they are 
necessary due to circumstances arising from the active 
duty or call to active duty of the covered military member 
● Making or updating financial and legal arrangements to 
address a covered military member’s absence 
● Attending counseling provided by someone other than a 
health care provider for oneself, the covered military 
member, or the child of the covered military member, the 
need for which arises from the active duty or call to active 
duty status of a covered military member 
● Taking up to five days of leave to spend time with a 
covered military member who is on short-term 
temporary, rest and recuperation leave during 
deployment 
● Attending to certain post-deployment activities, 
including attending arrival ceremonies, reintegration 
briefings and events, and other official ceremonies or 
programs sponsored by the military for a period of 90 
days following the termination of the covered military 
member’s active duty status, and addressing issues 
arising from the death of a covered military member 
● Any other event that the employee and employer agree is 
a qualifying exigency 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13A 
Page 5 of 11 
 
Special restrictions apply to teachers requesting leaves, 
depending on the length and timing of the leave(s).  Please 
call the Office of Human Resources for advice regarding 
special rules that apply to teachers in these situations.  
4. Requesting a Leave of Absence: Notice Requirement 
If the need for leave is foreseeable, an employee must 
provide BPS with at least 30 days notice. If 30 days notice is 
not practicable, notice must be given as soon as possible, 
generally the same or next business day.  All employees 
must submit their leave request through the online Request 
for Leave of Absence application (instructions and more 
information below in Section 8). 
Employees requesting absences of 5 days or less to fulfill 
National Guard or Military Reserve responsibilities must 
submit a request on ess.boston.gov and provide supporting 
documentation to the Responsibility Center manager. 
Absences of 6 days or more must be submitted through the 
online application. 
5. Certification(s)/Documentation 
WH-380-E/F form or medical certification/documentation 
on official letterhead from a health care provider is required 
for leave because of a serious health condition. Second or 
third opinions may be required, as well as a fitness for duty 
report to return to work.   
6. Paid or Unpaid Leave and Benefits 
Leave is unpaid except to the extent that accrued sick leave, 
personal leave, or vacation leave applies, as provided in 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13A 
Page 6 of 11 
 
applicable collective bargaining agreements or school 
department policy. Employees who are taking leave for their 
own serious health condition will be required to use their 
accrued paid sick leave and vacation leave during their 
FMLA leave until such paid leave has been exhausted. 
Employees who are taking FMLA leave to care for their 
spouse, child, or parent will be required to use all accrued 
paid vacation leave during their FMLA leave until such paid 
leave has been exhausted. After an employee’s accrued paid 
leave has been exhausted, any remaining FMLA leave will be 
unpaid.  
Medical insurance as part of a group health plan must be 
maintained.  However, benefits do not accrue during unpaid 
leave unless otherwise provided by the terms of an 
applicable collective bargaining agreement. 
7. Relationship to Other Leaves Provided by Collective 
Bargaining Agreements or Policy 
This leave neither diminishes nor augments any greater 
leave for the same purpose which may be provided for in a 
collective bargaining agreement or other law or policy. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13A 
Page 7 of 11 
 
8. Requesting Leave of Absence 
All employees must submit a request for leave electronically 
via the online application. Once the leave request is 
submitted electronically, it is automatically sent to the 
principal/head of school of the employee’s school for 
notification and to the Office of Human Resources for 
review. Employees and supervisors will automatically be 
notified whether the leave was approved, denied, or is 
pending due to documentation, through their BPS email. To 
request a leave:  
● Access the Office of Human Resources Workspace.  
○ Click on “Office of Human Resources Workspace.” 
○ Click on “Forms” tab. 
○ From the drop-down menu, select “Leave 
Request.” 
○ Read through the instructions and complete 
application. 
● Access the application to request a leave of absence 
online. 
SMALL NECESSITIES LEAVE ACT (SNLA): EMPLOYEE LEAVE FOR 
FAMILY OBLIGATIONS [STATE LAW:  24 HOUR ANNUAL LEAVE]  
1. Eligibility 
Employees who have been employed for at least 12 months 
at the BPS and who have worked at least 1,250 hours in the 
prior 12-month period are eligible (same as for federal family 
and medical leave). 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13A 
Page 8 of 11 
 
2. Purpose 
● To participate in school activities directly related to the 
advancement of the employee's son or daughter, such as 
a parent-teacher conference or interview for a new 
school. 
○ A son or daughter includes foster child, a legal 
ward or a child of a person standing in loco 
parentis, under 18 years of age or older but 
incapable of self-care. 
○ School includes Head Start or a licensed day care 
facility. 
● To accompany a son or daughter to a routine medical or 
dental appointment, such as a routine check-up or 
vaccination. 
● Accompany an elderly relative (60 years or more) to a 
routine medical or dental appointment or for other 
professional services, such as interviewing at a nursing 
home. 
3. Length of Leave and Increments 
Leave may be taken in increments of at least one hour for 
up to 24 hours in any fiscal year. 
This leave augments leave taken under the federal Family 
and Medical Leave Act, as it is for a different purpose.  It 
does not diminish any greater leave which may be provided 
for in a collective bargaining agreement or other school 
policy. 
REQUEST FOR LEAVE: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13A 
Page 9 of 11 
 
If the need for leave is foreseeable, employees must give the 
Office of Human Resources at least seven (7) days prior notice. If 
the need is not foreseeable, the employee must notify their 
Responsibility Center manager as soon as practicable given the 
circumstances of the case.  To the extent possible, employees 
must provide written notice of the need for leave. 
1. Certification/Documentation 
All employees must use the attached certification (page 7) 
to request a SNLA leave. Applying for this leave cannot be 
done through the Hub. The original copy must be submitted 
to the Responsibility Center manager, who will forward it to 
the Office of Human Resources. 
2. Paid or Unpaid Leave 
Leave for family obligations is unpaid unless an employee 
chooses to substitute accrued vacation or personal time for 
the unpaid leave, as provided in the applicable collective 
bargaining agreement, school department policy, and 
except as may be provided for in state law or city ordinance. 
 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13A 
Page 10 of 11 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
 
Owner: 
Leave of Absence Team 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone 
617-635-9255 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
ohrleaves@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13A 
Page 11 of 11 
 
SMALL NECESSITIES LEAVE ACT 
EMPLOYEE LEAVE FOR FAMILY OBLIGATIONS UP TO  
TWENTY-FOUR (24) HOURS 
EMPLOYEE'S CERTIFICATION 
I certify that on ________________________I will/did take _____________  
 hours of leave for the following purpose: 
 to participate in school activities directly related to the 
educational advancement of a son or daughter. 
 to accompany a son or daughter to routine medical or 
dental appointments, such as check-ups or 
vaccinations.  
 to accompany an elderly relative to routine medical or 
dental appointment or appointment for other 
professional services related to the elder's care. 
Furthermore, I understand that this absence will be recorded 
with the use of my (please select one): 
 Sick Time 
 Comp. Time  
 
 
 Floating Holiday 
 Vacation Time 
 Personal Time 
 
 
 
 
Employee’s Signature: ____________________________________________  
Employee’s Name (print): _________________________________________  
Employee’s ID Number:  _____________________  
Date: ________________________________________  
Submit original copy to Responsibility Center Manager. 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PM02A 
Version 01 
 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF  
NON-INSTRUCTIONAL BASAS ADMINISTRATORS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Document Purpose 
Purpose of Performance Management 
Evaluation Process Overview 
The Five-Step Process 
Step 1: Self-Assessment 
Step 2: Analysis, Goal setting, and Analysis 
Step 3: Implementation of the Plan 
Step 4: Formative Assessment  
Step 5: Summative Evaluation (June 15) 
Upward Feedback 
Evaluation Platform and Documentation 
Timeline and Tools 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 2 of 11 
 
 
 
Appendix A: Core Competencies 
Appendix B: Rating Levels 
Appendix C: Goal Status Scale 
DOCUMENT PURPOSE 
This document describes the performance management and 
evaluation process for Non-Instructional BASAS Administrators 
assigned to schools and central office departments. The purpose 
of this document is to provide clarity to employees and 
supervisors, as well as templates and tools for use during the 
process. Please refer to Circular HRS-PM02 - Performance 
Evaluation of Instructional BASAS Administrators for 
Instructional BASAS staff evaluation procedures. 
PURPOSE OF PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT 
Boston Public Schools (BPS) students are the citizens, leaders, 
scholars, entrepreneurs, advocates, and innovators of tomorrow. 
As a city and district, we must ensure that 100 percent of our 
students are prepared for college, career, and life in the 21st 
century. We must model our district and Central Office on the 
classroom we want to see. We have established a system of 
performance management to affirm the ideal that everyone, 
from students to the superintendent, must have sufficient 
resources, information, and support to achieve efficacy in their 
endeavors. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 3 of 11 
 
 
 
The fundamental purpose of performance management in BPS 
schools and Central Office is to maximize the productivity and 
impact of our employees by enabling them to perform at their 
fullest potential. Our approach is designed to provide high-
quality support to schools, students, and families in BPS to 
ensure our graduates are college, career, and life ready. To do so, 
our performance management system will: 
 
1. Establish a consistent set of competencies to clearly set and 
communicate expectations for employee performance. 
2. Align employee efforts with department and organizational 
goals. 
3. Create systems and structures that gather and monitor 
performance to support employee feedback, growth, and 
development. 
4. Identify areas of strength to leverage for increased impact, 
and areas of growth for providing targeted support. 
5. Provide accountability for individuals and enable them to 
see their contribution to and progress toward organizational 
goals. 
6. Connect employee performance to incentives, recognition, 
professional growth, and retention efforts. 
EVALUATION PROCESS OVERVIEW 
Non-instructional BASAS members may be evaluated by the 
team leader, responsibility center manager, supervisor, or their 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 4 of 11 
 
 
 
designee. The criteria for effective practice for non-instructional 
BASAS administrators are identified in the Core Competencies, 
which defines six categories listed below. See Appendix A for 
greater detail on the Core Competencies. 
1. Results Orientation 
2. Collaboration and Communication 
3. Job Knowledge and Skills 
4. Cultural Competency & Equitable Practices 
5. Responsiveness and Service Focus 
6. Leadership [for staff members supervising people or 
projects] 
 
Evaluations will result in goal 
ratings, competency ratings, 
and an overall performance 
rating, which will be based on 
the supervisor’s judgment on 
evidence of performance 
against the standards and 
progress toward goals. 
Progress toward goals will be 
rated as “Goal Achieved,” “Goal 
Significantly Met,” “Active 
Goal,” “Goal Not Met,” and “Goal Deferred.” Greater details 
on these rating levels can be found in Appendix B (at the 
end of this document). 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 5 of 11 
 
 
 
The five levels of performance which apply to performance on 
each competency and the overall performance rating shall be: 
“Highly Effective,” “Effective,” “Developing,” “Minimally Effective,” 
and “Ineffective.” Greater details on these rating levels can be 
found in Appendix B (at the end of this document). 
THE FIVE-STEP PROCESS 
Based on best practices in performance evaluation, BPS has 
adopted a five-step process for evaluation. This process should be 
followed each year by the employee and their supervisor. 
 
Step 1:  Self-Assessment (by September 1) 
The employee reviews available evidence of work performance, 
prior feedback and evaluations, and the Core Competencies to 
determine areas of strength and areas for further growth. The 
Self-Assessment is used to inform the employee’s goals and 
action plan for the upcoming year. 
Step 2: Analysis, Goal Setting, and Analysis (by October 1) 
Based on the employee’s self-assessment, job description, 
individual aspiration, and school/department goals, the employee 
and their supervisor establish 2-4 goals, related to professional 
practice or performance: 
● A professional practice goal relates to an identified skill or 
set of knowledge that an employee wants to develop or 
improve. When developing a professional practice goal, the 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 6 of 11 
 
 
 
employee and their supervisor should both look at past 
performance and feedback, as well as the employee’s 
professional/career aspirations. Professional practice goals 
should align to one or more of the Core Competencies. 
● A performance goal is a measurable target or outcome 
related to an employee’s work. Goals should align with an 
employee’s team and/or departmental goal(s). 
Step 3: Implementation of the Plan (ongoing) 
The employee performs job duties and responsibilities, 
implements the action steps toward goals, submits evidence 
supporting proficiency, and meets with their supervisor to 
receive and discuss feedback. The supervisor collects and reviews 
evidence, provides ongoing, timely, clear, and actionable 
feedback, and meets with the employee to give and discuss 
feedback, including recommendations for improvement, if 
applicable. 
Step 4: Formative Assessment (optional by February 1) 
Each employee should receive a formative assessment to provide 
the employee with formal feedback on their performance against 
the Core Competencies and their progress toward goals. 
Typically, the formative will occur midway through the 
assessment year, though may take place earlier for individuals in 
need of additional support. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 7 of 11 
 
 
 
Step 5: Summative Evaluation (June 15) 
Each employee shall receive a summative evaluation to provide 
the employee with formal feedback and ratings of their 
performance, and progress toward goals. 
Upward Feedback 
In this process, upward feedback from direct reports and school 
leaders (when applicable), as well as peer feedback, should be 
incorporated into an employee’s performance evaluation.  
EVALUATION PLATFORM AND DOCUMENTATION 
Beginning September 2023, non-instructional BASAS 
administrators’ evaluations and related documentation will be 
generated and stored in the BPS online performance 
management platform, VectorEvals. Employees and supervisors 
will receive training in accessing, navigating, and using the 
platform prior to the start of their evaluation cycle. Training 
modules will be available in an online, on-demand format to the 
employee and their supervisor for reference, as well. 
 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 8 of 11 
 
 
 
TIMELINE 
Date 
Activity 
July - August Office, team, and individual goal setting begins. 
Supervisors review of standards and expectations with 
employees. 
September 1 
Employee self-assessments due. 
Employee goals & action plans draft due. 
October 1 
Finalized employee goals & action plans due. 
Ongoing 
Employee check-ins, at the discretion of individual. 
Provide feedback (verbal and written) to employees on 
progress toward goals, observed performance, and 
work products/artifacts. 
Implementation also includes peer feedback. 
January 1 - 
February 1 
Formative assessment meetings with employees. 
February 1 
Formative assessments (optional) finalized and 
submitted. 
June 1  
Last day to submit artifacts for review prior to 
summative evaluation. 
June 15  
Summative evaluations finalized and submitted. 
APPENDIX A: THE CORE COMPETENCIES (LINK TO SEPARATE 
DOCUMENT) 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 9 of 11 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B: RATING LEVELS 
Effectiveness 
Level 
Description 
Highly Effective Performance far exceeded expectations due to 
exceptionally high quality of work performed in all essential 
areas of responsibility, resulting in an overall quality of work 
that was superior; and either 
included the completion of a major goal or project or 
made an exceptional or unique contribution in support of 
team, department, or district objectives. 
This level is achievable by any employee though given 
infrequently (<10% of employees). 
Effective 
Performance met expectations in all essential areas of 
responsibility, and the quality of work overall was excellent. 
Annual goals were met. 
Developing 
Performance consistently met expectations in all essential 
areas of responsibility, at times possibly exceeding 
expectations, and the quality of work overall was very good. 
The most critical annual goals were met. 
This level is expected for individuals who are new to the 
organization or to a role. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 10 of 11 
 
 
 
Minimally 
Effective 
Performance did not consistently meet expectations – 
performance failed to meet expectations in one or more 
essential areas of responsibility, and/or one or more of the 
most critical goals were not met.  A professional 
development plan to improve performance must be 
attached, including timelines, and monitored to measure 
progress. 
Ineffective 
Performance was consistently below expectations in most 
essential areas of responsibility, and/or reasonable progress 
toward critical goals was not made. Significant 
improvement is needed in one or more important areas. A 
plan to correct performance, including timelines, must be 
outlined and monitored to measure progress. 
 
 
APPENDIX C: GOAL STATUS SCALE 
Goal Status 
Description 
Goal Achieved 
All goal milestones and success measures have 
been achieved for 100% of goals. 
Goal Significantly 
Met 
All goal milestones and success measures have 
been achieved for at least 85% of goal. 
Active Goal 
The goal is still in progress, though some 
milestones may have been achieved. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02A 
Page 11 of 11 
 
 
 
Goal Not Met 
For this goal, some or all milestones and success 
measures have not been met. 
Goal Deferred 
For timing or organizational reasons, this goal has 
been deferred. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Evaluation and Performance 
Management 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Boston, MA 
02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9627 
E-mail: 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PM07A 
Version 01 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF NON-CLASSROOM 
PARAPROFESSIONALS 
INCLUDED EMPLOYEES IN THIS CIRCULAR: 
● Community Field Coordinator (CFC) 
● Health Para 
● Library Para 
● Physical Ed Para 
● Security Para 
● Sign Language Interpreter 
● Swim Para 
● Cota Para 
● Family Liaison 
FORMAL EVALUATION 
All staff shall be formally evaluated using standards and 
indicators reasonably related to a paraprofessional performance, 
with a mark for each standard and an overall rating.  Overall 
ratings shall be: “Exemplary,” “Proficient,” “Needs 
Improvement,” and “Unsatisfactory,” and shall be transmitted to 
Paraprofessionals by the last business day prior to May 15 via the 
VectorEvals platform. If the para has access to a BPS-issued 
computer, they may sign digitally. If the para does not, the form 
must be printed from VectorEvals for them to sign and then 
uploaded as a PDF attachment to the digital form. 
Paraprofessionals will generally be evaluated formally every two 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07A 
Page 2 of 8 
 
years, except as set forth in section 7 below.  During each school 
year, each principal/head of school or director will identify 
approximately one-half of the staff for which that administrator is 
responsible for evaluating during that year.  The process of 
identifying the evaluees will be determined by the responsible 
administrator.  An administrator may also evaluate a staff 
member not originally identified, if assistance, supervision, or 
intervention is deemed appropriate based on informal 
observation. 
EVALUATORS 
1. No supervisor shall supervise or evaluate a relative. 
2. The head of school, principal, or other administrative head 
outside of the bargaining unit will be responsible for all 
evaluations.  However, they may be assisted by other 
qualified persons (who are not members of the bargaining 
unit) designated by the School Department 
SCHEDULE, MEETINGS, AND PROCEDURES 
1. At the beginning of each school year, the responsible 
administrator or their designee shall meet with 
Paraprofessionals for the purpose of explaining the 
evaluation program and instrument and answering 
questions.  The building administrator may be assisted by 
other qualified persons designated by the School 
Department. Classroom visits may be a combination of 
announced and unannounced visits. 
For any classroom visit resulting in written feedback 
indicating a deficiency in the paraprofessional’s practice, the 
responsible supervisor shall provide such written feedback 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07A 
Page 3 of 8 
 
to the paraprofessional before releasing the next Formative 
or Summative Evaluation. 
2. Within ten (10) school days during which the 
paraprofessional is present following the last observation to 
be used as the basis of the evaluation, regardless of the 
rating mark, the responsible administrator or designee shall 
meet with the paraprofessional for the purpose of 
discussing the evaluation.  At this meeting, the 
paraprofessional will be given two (2) copies of the written 
evaluation, signed, and dated by the responsible 
administrator.  
The paraprofessional shall sign and return one (1) copy to 
indicate having received it, but not to indicate agreement or 
disagreement.  No paraprofessional shall be asked to sign an 
incomplete evaluation form.  Paraprofessionals shall be 
allowed to attach their written comments to the evaluation 
form.  A paraprofessional whose overall performance has 
been judged as less than proficient at any point during the 
school year shall be so notified in writing and shall meet 
directly with the responsible administrator. 
3. In any area where the responsible administrator or designee 
indicates a need for improvement, they will provide the 
paraprofessional with a written prescription.  The 
paraprofessional may attach comments to the prescription.      
If a paraprofessional’s performance results in an overall 
formative evaluation or summative evaluation rating of 
“Needs Improvement” or “Unsatisfactory”, the evaluation 
prescription may contain a requirement that a 
paraprofessional takes advantage of additional professional 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07A 
Page 4 of 8 
 
development training or other opportunities offered by or 
through the School Department to correct a weakness or 
deficiency which caused the less than proficient rating.  For 
purposes of this contract, “formative” means evaluations 
that at a minimum are twenty (20) school days apart.   
If, after allowing adequate time to improve, the 
paraprofessional continues to need improvement, the 
responsible administrator may include in the evaluation 
prescription that the paraprofessional may voluntarily take 
advantage of training or in-service training to correct a 
deficiency.  
4. If the responsible administrator had adjudged a 
paraprofessional’s practice with an overall rating of 
“Unsatisfactory” on at least four (4) formative evaluations 
within a twelve (12) month period in which the 
Paraprofessional reported to work or on at least (2) 
formative evaluations plus a summative evaluation, the 
responsible administrator may initiate termination by 
recommending to the Superintendent that such 
paraprofessional be terminated. If the Superintendent 
approves the principal’s recommendation, the principal shall 
notify the paraprofessional, in writing, of their intent to 
dismiss the paraprofessional. The paraprofessional may then 
request a meeting with the principal to discuss their intent 
to dismiss. This request must be made in writing within ten 
(10) days of the paraprofessional’s receipt of the intent to 
dismiss notice. Overall “Unsatisfactory” evaluation ratings 
need not occur in consecutive months.  
An overall rating of “Unsatisfactory” on a summative 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07A 
Page 5 of 8 
 
evaluation rating must be preceded by at least two 
formative overall “Unsatisfactory” ratings during that school 
year.  A paraprofessional may be removed from the 
classroom, dismissed, or suspended for just cause prior to 
the completion of the prescriptive period specified in this 
paragraph.  
5. After each of the first three (3) formative evaluation overall 
“Unsatisfactory” ratings that are based in whole or in part 
upon observed performance, the responsible administrator 
shall conduct a follow-up evaluation. This evaluation shall 
include observation of performance and take place no 
sooner than twenty (20) school days and no later than fifty 
(50) school days after the previous “Unsatisfactory” 
evaluation.  
If an overall formative evaluation “Unsatisfactory” rating is 
based upon other than performance, then the responsible 
administrator must clearly convey the reasons in writing to 
the paraprofessional and follow prescribed procedures for 
progressive discipline.  
6. A formative or summative evaluation with an overall 
“Unsatisfactory” rating shall be maintained as a permanent 
part of the employee’s personnel record and may be grieved 
and arbitrated. an employee may grieve a summative 
evaluation with an overall rating other than “Unsatisfactory” 
up to but not beyond the level of the Step 2 hearing officer, 
who shall have the authority to rectify the grievance. Any 
such grievance shall be dealt with expeditiously.  In the 
event of a concurrent dismissal, the grievances shall be 
merged and treated as a single grievance. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07A 
Page 6 of 8 
 
Notwithstanding the above, disputes concerning the 
paraprofessional's rating in any of the individual standards 
found within a formative or summative evaluation not 
resulting in an overall "Unsatisfactory" rating are neither 
grievable nor arbitrable. Similarly, disputes concerning 
comments made by the responsible administrator within an 
observation or formative and summative evaluation are 
neither grievable nor arbitrable. 
7. The following individuals shall be evaluated annually prior to 
November 15 if possible: 
a. Paraprofessionals who were evaluated during the 
previous school year as “Unsatisfactory” overall or in a 
particular area. 
b. All paraprofessionals who are new to the building. 
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07A 
Page 7 of 8 
 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
By the last business day 
prior to November 15 
● Evaluation of Paraprofessionals who 
received an “Unsatisfactory” in their 
evaluation from the prior school year. 
● Evaluation of Paraprofessionals who are 
new to the school building. 
By the last business day 
prior to May 15  
● Deadline to submit evaluation on 
VectorEvals platform.  
* If the para has access to a BPS-issued 
computer, they may sign digitally. If 
para does not, the form must be 
printed from VectorEvals for them to 
sign and then uploaded as a PDF 
attachment to the digital form.  
● Evaluation of paraprofessionals due 
every 2 years except for 
paraprofessionals new to the building 
or who received a “Does Not Meet 
Standards” rating the previous school 
year. 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07A 
Page 8 of 8 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
 
Owner: 
Director of Evaluation and Performance 
Management 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Boston, MA 
02119 
 
 
Email: 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org 
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
► Click to view a SAMPLE Non-Classroom Paraprofessional 
Evaluation Form (PDF). Evaluators should use VectorEvals to 
submit their evaluations. 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-HS07.1 
Version 01 
 
QUALIFICATIONS FOR ADDITIONAL PROGRAM AREAS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded by a 
subsequent version. 
Permanent teachers in Boston Public Schools may choose to 
apply for additional program areas. These are non-primary 
subject area(s) in which a teacher currently holds license(s). 
QUALIFICATIONS FOR ADDITIONAL PROGRAM AREAS 
To be deemed qualified in program areas other than the 
"primary" subject area in which a teacher is currently teaching, a 
teacher must hold a valid license in the subject area. The Office of 
Human Resources will verify licensure with the Massachusetts 
Department of Education. Re-licensure does not meet this 
criterion. 
In addition to holding a valid license in the subject area, the 
employee must satisfy at least one of the criteria below: 
1. The Massachusetts State license is not more than five (5) 
years old. 
2. A mean score on the Praxis Exam, not more than ten (10) 
years old. 
3. Fifteen (15) course credits, graduate or undergraduate, 
approved as relevant to the program area qualification. All 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07.1 
Page 2 of 4 
 
coursework must have been completed within the past five 
(5) years. Original transcripts are required if claiming an area 
under this provision. When submitting transcripts, please 
indicate the fifteen (15) course credits relevant to the 
program area qualification. If transcripts are not submitted 
by the deadline, the application can be denied. 
4. Two (2) years of teaching experience within Boston Public 
Schools in the subject area in the last ten (10) years. A 
creditable year is one in which at least 50% of the weekly 
schedule is in the subject area. A letter from the head of 
school or principal stating that you taught at least 50% of 
the weekly schedule in that area and designation of the 
specific year(s) will be required in the area you are claiming 
under this provision. If a letter is not submitted by the 
deadline, the application can be denied. 
 
Permanent teachers who wish to apply for additional program 
areas must submit their request via the  Additional Program Area 
Request form. Supplemental materials must be submitted to the 
Office of Human Resources by mail or in person.  
 Applications and complete documentation must be 
submitted to the Office of Human Resources by January 
15, 2024. Applications received after this date will not be 
reviewed. 
The Office of Human Resources has transitioned to using online 
forms. The link to the Additional Program Area Request form can 
be found below. Employees will be required to sign in with their 
Boston Public Schools Gmail account. Supplemental materials 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07.1 
Page 3 of 4 
 
such as transcripts can be submitted via mail or in person to the 
Office of Human Resources. 
LINK TO APPLY 
• Additional Program Area Request form 
• Or copy this URL: 
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdD7uA5nLZH
uEKE5pP4uD-gYtf74RCtzEcYZrgeauvwmNBB-
g/viewform 
SUPPLEMENTAL DOCUMENTATION 
 
Application approval is contingent on submission of one of the 
following documents: 
● Official transcript(s) indicating the completion of fifteen 
(15) graduate or undergraduate course credits relevant to 
the program area qualification 
● A signed letter from the head of school/principal 
confirming the following information: 
○ The subject area you taught (relevant to your 
application) 
○ The specific years (at least 2) during which you taught 
the subject (must be within the last 10 years) 
○ Confirmation that you taught at least 50% of the 
weekly schedule in that area. 
 
Please submit supplemental documents to the contact listed 
below. 
For more information about this circular, please contact: 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07.1 
Page 4 of 4 
 
Owner: 
School Based Staffing 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Fax: 
617-635-7956 
Email: 
For additional questions, please submit an 
HR Inquiry Ticket via the Beacon. This can 
be found on Access Boston 
(access.boston.gov). 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PM04 
Version 01 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF NON-DESE-
LICENSED BTU SPECIALISTS, BTU CENTRAL OFFICE 
ADMINISTRATORS AND OTHER BTU PROFESSIONALS 
 
Below is the evaluation instrument for BTU employees in roles 
which do not require licensure by the Massachusetts Department 
of Elementary and Secondary Education, in accordance with 603 
CMR 35.00, et seq, or where otherwise agreed upon by BPS and 
BTU. 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
June 1 
Deadline for completion of annual 
evaluations. 
June 15 
Deadline for signed, original copies of 
evaluation form (below/attached) to be 
submitted to:  
Bruce C. Bolling Municipal Building 
Office of Human Resources 
Attn: OHC Front Desk 
2300 Washington Street, 4th floor 
Roxbury, MA 02119 
July 1 to June 30 
The evaluation year of non-DESE-
licensed BTU Employees. 
 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM04 
Page 2 of 8 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Director of Evaluation and Performance 
Management 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Boston, 
MA 02119 
Email: 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org   
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM04 
Page 3 of 8 
 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS PERFORMANCE EVALUATION FORM 
NON-DESE-LICENSED BTU SPECIALISTS, BTU CENTRAL OFFICE 
ADMINISTRATORS AND OTHER BTU PROFESSIONALS 
Name of Employee ________________________ Empl No.  ___________ 
Position _______________________________ Dept./Level 
 
Evaluator ________________________________ Prior Rating 
 
Check One:  
Interim  
 
 
Year end 
 
The administrator/professional will be rated on each standard 
within the various categories. There are two possible ratings: 
Satisfactory (S): The performance of the administrator/ 
professional meets the standards and expectations of the school 
department. 
Unsatisfactory (U): The administrator/professional fails to meet 
the standards and their performance, as measured against these 
standards, is unsatisfactory. 
The evaluator will place a check or an X in the box under the 
rating that describes the administrator/professional’s 
performance on that standard. Any rating of “Unsatisfactory” 
must be accompanied by a description of the problem and 
prescription for improvement on the attached sheet. In the event 
a particular standard does not apply, record “NA” for not 
applicable. An overall evaluation of “Unsatisfactory” or 
“Satisfactory” must be given and recorded below. 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM04 
Page 4 of 8 
 
Overall Rating: 
Satisfactory  
Unsatisfactory 
Signature of Evaluator_______________________Date ____ /____/ 
 
Signature of Employee _______________________Date ____/____/____ 
The employee's signature indicates that they have received the 
evaluation and acknowledges it will be placed in their personnel 
file, but it does not denote agreement with its contents. 
 
1. INSTRUCTIONAL LEADERSHIP ROLE 
S 
U 
Develop plans for the effective delivery of services.  
 
 
Monitors the quality and/or quantity of services provided.  
 
 
Assesses operations and recommends or makes changes as 
necessary. 
 
 
Completes all required reports thoroughly, clearly, accurately, 
and on time. 
 
 
Works cooperatively with Central Office, Cluster Office, and 
school personnel 
 
 
Collaborates with external agencies as necessary. 
 
 
Communicates, implements, and monitors compliance with 
policies and procedures of the School Department and 
external agencies as appropriate.  
 
 
Demonstrates sound fiscal judgment in budgetary decisions. 
 
 
Provides staff with leadership, orientation and training as 
required. 
 
 
Acts in accordance with prescribed organizational structure. 
 
 
Organizes and coordinates own activities and those of staff. 
 
 
Ensures compliance in area of responsibility with policies, 
procedures, and contractual obligations of the School 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM04 
Page 5 of 8 
 
Department, and all legal mandates. 
Demonstrates ability to analyze and use information in 
decision-making process. 
 
 
Explains performance standards, duties and responsibilities 
and evaluates staff in accordance with School Department 
policies. 
 
 
 
Maintains all appropriate records required for the operation of 
the unit. 
 
 
Exercises sound judgment in the performance of one’s duties 
 
 
Exercises sound judgment in the performance of one’s duties. 
 
 
Communicates accurately and effectively. 
 
 
2. PROFESSIONAL ROLE 
 
S 
U 
Carries out responsibilities in a professional manner. 
 
 
Maintains regular attendance and punctuality. 
 
 
Attends conferences, seminars, workshops, and activities that 
contribute to one’s professional growth and development. 
 
 
Attends conferences, seminars, workshops, and activities that 
contribute to one’s professional growth and development.  
 
 
Attends conferences, seminars, workshops, and activities that 
contribute to one’s professional growth and development. 
 
 
Utilizes appropriate resources to effectively carry out 
professional responsibilities.  
 
 
Demonstrates receptivity to constructive suggestions related to 
professional role and responds appropriately. 
 
 
Maintains professional demeanor. 
 
 
Performs additional job-related tasks and functions assigned to 
them.  
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM04 
Page 6 of 8 
 
List additional mutually agreed upon standards or objectives, if 
any. 
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM04 
Page 7 of 8 
 
NOTES OF OBSERVATION 
(Use additional pages if necessary) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROBLEM AND PRESCRIPTION FOR 
IMPROVEMENT 
(Use additional pages if necessary) 
 
1. Description of the problem: 
 
Prescription: 
 
 
2. Description of the problem: 
 
Prescription: 
 
 
3. Description of the problem: 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM04 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 
Prescription: 
 
 
General Comments (use additional pages if necessary): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Employee’s Comments (use additional pages if necessary): 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
HRS-PP13 
Version 01 
 
EMPLOYEE SICK LEAVE POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The Boston School Committee will not permit any abuse of sick 
leave privileges. Sick leave is a benefit only to be used for 
absences caused by illness, injury, or exposure to contagious 
diseases. Those employees who use sick leave for any other 
purpose do a disservice to our students, to their co-workers, and 
to the taxpayers. A public perception that School Department 
employees abuse sick leave will undermine confidence in and 
support for public education in Boston. 
Accordingly, it is and shall be the policy of the Boston School 
Committee to monitor the sick leave practices of all its 
employees, to detect any sick leave abuse, and to discipline any 
employee found to have abused the sick leave privileges. No 
legitimate sick leave will be denied. No abuse will be tolerated. 
The Superintendent shall develop and promulgate appropriate 
rules and procedures to implement this sick leave policy. Copies 
of this policy shall be prominently posted at all work locations. 
Attached you will find a document entitled Employee Sick Leave 
Policy Guidelines. The document provides specific details 
regarding (1) the responsibility of each manager with regard to 
sick leave, (2) managerial intervention required, and (3) 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 2 of 10 
 
procedures mandated to ensure the effective implementation of 
the Employee Sick Leave Policy. A copy of these guidelines 
should be posted in the school office, and a copy should be made 
available in teachers' rooms for review by staff. 
The School Committee’s Employee Sick Leave Policy and 
Guidelines cover all employees of the Boston Public Schools. In 
accordance with the guidelines, employees absent for six (6) or 
more consecutive working days must apply for a leave of absence 
through the online application and provide a WH-380-E/F form or 
medical certification/documentation on official letterhead from a 
health care provider as determined by their Collective Bargaining 
Agreement, as well as a fitness for duty report to return to work. 
The medical certification should be on the physician's letterhead 
and should include: 
1. A statement that the physician understands the nature of 
the employee's duties and that the employee is incapable of 
performing the duties and responsibilities of their position. 
2. A statement of anticipated duration of the absence or the 
expected date of the return to work (if the duration is 
unknown, the letter should indicate when the employee will 
be seeing a physician again and an updated letter would be 
required after that visit). 
► Failure to provide the proper physician's certificate 
when required may lead to loss of pay. 
Absences interrupted by weekends and/or holidays are 
considered consecutive. 
All managers are directed to discuss the guidelines with all staff 
members at the beginning of the school year to ensure mutual 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 3 of 10 
 
understanding. Please note the guidelines are consistent with 
the BTU and BASAS contracts. 
The Office of Human Resources has information readily available 
on an employee's accumulated benefits such as vacation, sick 
leave, and personal days. It is also able to monitor the attendance 
of the entire School Department workforce. Principals, heads of 
school, and other administrative heads will be provided with 
periodic attendance data for employees under their jurisdiction. 
These reports are expected to assist managers in providing 
appropriate supervision for individuals who exhibit problematic 
attendance patterns. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Leave of Absence Team 
Department: 
Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9255 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
OHRLeaves@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
EMPLOYEE SICK LEAVE POLICY GUIDELINES 
STATEMENT 
The term “manager,” as used in these guidelines, refers to 
positions such as academic superintendent, senior officer, head 
of school, principal, program director, and director. It is expected 
that managers may in some cases delegate authority to carry out 
these procedures to supervisory personnel reporting to them. 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of these guidelines is to improve employee 
attendance and eliminate any abuse of sick leave benefits. Their 
consistent application by managers, and compliance by all 
employees, will make a substantial contribution toward our 
ultimate goal of providing an effective and high-quality 
education for the students in the Boston Public Schools. 
THE MANAGER HAS PRIMARY RESPONSIBILITY FOR 
EFFECTIVELY IMPLEMENTING THESE GUIDELINES: 
1. Managerial Responsibility: Absenteeism is one of the 
primary reasons for a manager's inability to accomplish 
expected results, since it results in less than optimal student 
progress, missed deadlines, low quality of work due to 
inexperienced replacements, scheduling and coverage 
problems, and low morale of employees who must assume 
the absentee's workload. Employee motivation and 
attendance are key factors affecting the productivity of each 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 5 of 10 
 
unit in the school system. A good attendance practice 
within a school or department is indicative of a well-
motivated and supervised workforce. Therefore, managers 
should realize that it is in their own best interest to develop 
and to maintain good attendance practices, since their 
effectiveness is measured by the accomplishments of their 
schools and departments. 
 
2. Managerial Judgment: Managers will be expected to 
implement these procedures, to counsel employees, and to 
take remedial action when a patterned abuse occurs. Each 
supervisor should analyze each situation based on its merits, 
considering such factors as length of service, total sick leave 
accumulation, number of occurrences (frequency), patterns 
of absenteeism, such as before and after weekends, holidays 
and vacations, severity rate (the duration of absence), and 
the employee's medical history that is previously known to 
the manager and/or from information that may be required 
to be on file with the School Department. 
 
Major attendance problems facing managers are: 
a. 
"Pre-retirement illness" — attempts by long-time 
employees to exhaust their sick leave benefits before 
retirement 
b. 
"Pre-layoff illness" — attempts by employees who 
received a notice for layoff to exhaust their sick leave 
benefits before the layoff becomes effective 
 
c. 
"Post contract non-renewal illness" —attempts by 
employees whose contract has not been renewed 
prior to exhausting sick leave. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 6 of 10 
 
3. Managerial Intervention:  It is important that the manager 
intervene as soon as an absence pattern is detectable. The 
manager can discuss the reasons for the pattern or the 
absences and can prevent the pattern of absences from 
becoming worse. 
Each manager must review the attendance records of each 
employee in their organization at least on a quarterly basis 
to monitor attendance practices and to determine if there 
are patterns of sick leave abuse. Each employee whose 
number of days or the number of occurrences exceed five 
consecutive days absent, and there is reasonable cause to 
believe that the absence is not an appropriate use of sick 
leave, must be interviewed by the manager. The purpose of 
this interview is to determine whether there is any 
possibility of sick leave abuse. A written record must be kept 
concerning the nature of the supervisory discussion or 
interview. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 7 of 10 
 
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS 
To ensure the effective implementation of the Employee Sick 
Leave Policy, employees must adhere to the following 
procedures: 
1. Notification 
a. Employees Serving in Schools:  These employees are 
not entitled to sick leave without loss of pay unless 
they have notified their head of school or principal, in 
accordance with the schedule established by the 
appropriate head of school/principal. Each employee 
must indicate the nature of the illness and the period 
of anticipated absence. If, at the expiration of the 
anticipated period, the employee is not recovered, the 
employee must again notify the head of 
school/principal of the reason for the additional period 
of anticipated absence in accordance with established 
practice at their school. Each school must maintain and 
post in appropriate locations a standard policy for 
notice of absence. 
b. Employees Not Serving in Schools:  These employees 
are not entitled to sick leave without loss of pay unless 
they have notified their manager of the absence, its 
cause, and anticipated duration before the expiration 
of the first fifteen (15) minutes after their normal 
reporting time or as soon as practical. If, at the 
expiration of the anticipated duration, the employee is 
not recovered, the employee must again notify the 
manager of the reason for the additional period of 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 8 of 10 
 
anticipated absence the day before the employee is 
expected to return to work. 
c. Illness During Work Hours: When an employee 
becomes ill during regular work hours, the employee 
must notify the manager. The manager will record the 
length of absence. 
d. Failure to Notify: Employees failing to give proper 
notice in the absence of extenuating circumstances 
shall be considered without authorization and are 
subject to progressive disciplinary action. 
e. Reporting time:  All managers must ensure that all 
time reporting is entered into the system consistent 
with established procedures in order that employee’s 
absences are correctly charged and leave balances 
maintained. As usual, Department Time Summary 
Reports must be submitted to the BPS Payroll Office in 
accordance with the payroll schedule. 
2. Physician's Certificate:  If the absence is of six (6) or more 
consecutive working days' duration, a physician's certificate 
will be required upon return to work, or prior to return if 
requested. When the record of repeated absences reflects a 
clear pattern of abuse — such as consistent three (3) days 
present, two (2) days absent — the manager should request 
a physician's certificate, even though it may not be required 
under the relevant collective bargaining contract. In such 
circumstances, the employee should be advised that a 
physician's certificate may be the only adequate refutation 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 9 of 10 
 
to the charge of sick leave abuse. The physician's certificate 
should include the following: 
a. A statement that the physician understands the nature 
of the employee's duties and that the employee is 
incapable of performing the duties and responsibilities 
of their position. 
b. A statement of anticipated duration of the absence or 
the expected date of return to work (if the duration is 
unknown, the letter should indicate when the 
employee will be seeing the physician again, and an 
updated letter would be required after that visit). 
If the physician's certificate does not include these 
statements, the manager must notify the employee to 
obtain the omitted information before authorizing sick 
leave. 
ALL MEDICAL INFORMATION SHALL BE MAINTAINED ON A 
CONFIDENTIAL BASIS. 
If, during the interview, the supervisor learns that an employee 
has a chronic or disabling condition which may qualify that 
person for consideration as a handicapped individual, (1) you 
should contact the Office of Equity at 617-635-9650. 
 
(1) 
1A handicapped individual includes someone who has, has 
had, or is thought of as having a physical or mental condition 
that substantially limits a major life activity, including working. 
The condition may be permanent or temporary. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 
Page 10 of 10 
 
A handicapped individual is defined as any person who has a 
physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or 
more major life activities, such as: caring for oneself, performing 
manual tasks, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, or learning. 
The Office of Human Resources and Office of the Legal Advisor 
are available for advice and counsel. 
While the managers are the central figures in managing 
attendance, the Office of Human Resources and Office of the 
Legal Advisor are prepared to provide them with the following 
technical support: 
1. Advise managers in their effort to change unacceptable 
absence patterns. 
2. Provide an early referral system for health, emotional, 
alcoholic, or drug-related matters. 
3. Provide an effective mechanism for a centralized sick leave 
and vacation reporting system. 
4. Interpret policy and procedures and assist in the resolution 
of operating problems. 
5. Provide advice concerning the implementation of 
progressive disciplinary action. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
HRS-PP17 
Version 01  
 
EMPLOYEE RESIGNATION, RETIREMENT, AND 
SEPARATION PROCEDURE 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
A resignation is a voluntary action taken by an employee who 
wishes to terminate their employment with the Boston Public 
Schools. 
RESIGNATION/SEPARATION 
An employee shall notify their immediate supervisor regarding 
termination of employment with Boston Public Schools. This 
notice must be in writing, state the employee’s last day of work, 
and be signed by the employee. A sample resignation letter 
(found on page 7) may be used to provide written notice.   
To submit a resignation letter:  
1. Complete the resignation termination form by clicking on 
the link  Termination/Retirement/Resignation Notification 
Form.  Complete the form and upload a signed letter of 
resignation. Please enter a personal email address on the 
resignation/termination form to receive the final email 
notification acknowledging your resignation from the Office 
of Human Resources. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP17 
Page 2 of 7 
 
2. The resignation form will send an email notification to your 
supervisor.  
3. Supervisors will approve/process, and notification will then 
be sent to the Office of Human Resources to process.    
4. An email notification finalizing the process will be emailed 
to your personal email address that you provide on the 
resignation/termination form. 
5. For those unable to access the link, you can have a 
supervisor or secretary complete the form on your behalf. 
The supervisor will submit via the online process for 
entering resignation/retirement/terminations.  Please 
provide your personal email address to receive the final 
email notification acknowledging your resignation from the 
Office of Human Resources.  
RETIREMENTS 
1. An employee who is planning to retire must first file an 
“Intent to Retire” with the City of Boston Retirement Board. 
Please note that pursuant to Retirement Board policy, an 
employee cannot file the Intent to Retire more than four (4) 
months prior to their intended retirement date.    
2. After you submit your signed Intent to Retire form to the 
Boston State Retirement Board, please complete the 
Resignation/Retirement form by clicking on the  link 
Termination/Retirement/Resignation Notification Form.   
3. Upload a signed letter resigning for the purpose of retiring 
along with your signed Intent To Retire form that you 
submitted to the Retirement Board. Please enter a personal 
email address on the retirement/resignation form to receive 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP17 
Page 3 of 7 
 
an email notification acknowledging your 
retirement/resignation when finalized by the Office of 
Human Resources.   
4. Resignation/Retirement form will send an email notification 
to your supervisor who will sign off on the notification of 
your resignation/retirement and submit notification to the 
Office of Human Resources to finalize the retirement 
termination process.    
5. For those unable to access the link, you can have a 
supervisor or secretary complete the form on your behalf.  
The supervisor will submit via the online process for 
entering resignation/retirement/terminations.  Please 
provide your personal email address to receive the final 
email notification acknowledging your 
retirement/resignation.  
For more information on the retirement process, employees 
should contact the Boston Retirement Board for an appointment 
by telephone at 617-635-4311 or via email at 
retirementboard@boston.gov.  The Retirement Board is located 
at 1 City Hall Square, Room 816, Boston, MA 02201-2038. 
CANCELLATION OF RESIGNATION/RETIREMENT 
Resignations and retirements may be canceled before an 
employee’s effective date of termination.  A signed letter must be 
received by the Office of Human Resources and Retirement 
Board if canceling retirement prior to the close of business on the 
original resignation/retirement date.   
Once the resignation effective date has passed, an employee may 
return to the Boston Public Schools only through the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP17 
Page 4 of 7 
 
reemployment process by applying for a position. 
EMPLOYEE SEPARATION CHECKLIST (EMPLOYEE PORTION): 
Terminating employees are advised to complete the following 
prior to exiting Boston Public Schools: 
1. Complete the resignation/retirement termination 
notification form and upload a signed letter of resignation to 
your school/dept or OHC over the summer months by 
clicking on the link Termination/Retirement/Resignation 
Notification Form.  See sample resignation letter on page 4 
of this circular. 
2. Please return any Boston Public Schools property that you 
still have in your possession, e.g., keys, cell phone, laptop, 
etc., on or before your last day of employment. For keys and 
school building materials, please contact your school leader 
to arrange to return those items. 
3. L4L Laptop (Laptops for Learning), please call the OIIT 
Service Desk, 617-635-9200 to schedule an appointment to 
return the laptop, bag, and peripherals. 
4. Enter all Absence Requests on Employee Self Service (ESS). 
5. Cancel any meetings or out of district activities that are 
scheduled prior to the last day of employment and work 
with your supervisor to achieve a smooth transfer of duties.  
6. Update your home address for future correspondence (i.e., 
final paycheck, W2, benefit information, severance etc.); 
remove mailing address if home address is same as mailing 
address.  
7. Remove all personal files from district servers and 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP17 
Page 5 of 7 
 
computers. 
8. Inform your supervisor of the location of job-related files and 
make those files accessible to the supervisor. 
EMPLOYEE SEPARATION CHECKLIST (SUPERVISOR PORTION): 
An employee’s supervisor is responsible for collecting the 
following applicable items and/or addressing the following 
issues: 
1. Have the employee enter the resignation/retirement letter 
on the electronic termination form at this link  
Termination/Retirement/Resignation Notification Form, or 
you or your secretary can complete the form and upload the 
employee’s signed letter of resignation on the employee’s 
behalf. A sample letter is located on page 4 of this circular. 
2. Process all absences on Employee Self Service in a timely 
manner.  
3. Obtain the following items (all that apply): 
a. Keys (office, building, cabinet, desk, vehicles, other). 
b. Badge/ID (office, building, other). 
c. Department issued equipment (computers, laptops 
(except L4L laptops), printers, modems, etc.) See above 
for L4L laptop returns to OIIT. 
d. Cell phone and accessories, pager, radios. 
e. Department issued uniforms. 
f. Department issued property. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP17 
Page 6 of 7 
 
BENEFITS 
An employee may be eligible to continue to purchase certain 
benefits after they leave. Upon loss of coverage for an employee 
and/or their eligible dependent(s), a COBRA notification packet 
will be mailed to the employee and/or their eligible dependent(s). 
The law requires that this packet be sent by mail to the last 
known address of the employee and/or the employee's eligible 
dependent(s). For additional information on COBRA, see COBRA 
Questions and Answers.  
Please contact the City of Boston Health Benefits Office at 617-
635-4570 for further information.  
The Office of Human Resources provides this FAQ Retirements, 
Resigning, Non-Renewal, Lay Off.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Employee Services 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury MA 02119 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
employeeservices@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP17 
Page 7 of 7 
 
SAMPLE EMPLOYEE RESIGNATION LETTER 
Employee Name: 
Employee Address: 
Date: 
 
Dear (Principal/Head of School/Supervisor), 
This letter is to inform you that I will be resigning from my 
position as [name of position] at [name of school or department] 
effective [date]. 
Optional: May include reasons for resigning in the body of the 
form. 
I certify that this resignation is executed by me voluntarily and of 
my own free will. 
 
Employee Name: 
Employee Signature: 
Date: 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-L02 
Version 01 
 
REQUIREMENTS FOR PARAPROFESSIONALS  
UNDER ESSA 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The US Department of Education Every Student Succeeds Act 
(ESSA) requires that all instructional paraprofessionals meet 
specific employment requirements in order to be designated 
“Highly Qualified”. These requirements apply to all schoolwide 
programs without regard to whether the positions are funded 
with federal, state, or local funds. To be considered Highly 
Qualified, paraprofessionals will need to possess specific skills in 
reading, writing, math, and instruction (as outlined in 
Attachment A of this Superintendent’s Circular).  
I. ESSA REQUIREMENTS FOR PARAPROFESSIONALS 
There are currently two available options for paraprofessionals to 
be deemed Highly Qualified: 
● Pathway 1: Associate’s Degree or 48 Credit Hours of 
Coursework 
The paraprofessional obtained an Associate’s (or higher) 
degree OR completed at least 48 credit hours of 
coursework at an institution of higher education (IHE). If 
this pathway was selected the paraprofessional should 
submit to the Principal/Headmaster all relevant transcripts. 
 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 2 of 12 
 
● Pathway 2: Formal Standardized Assessment 
The paraprofessional passed a formal standardized 
assessment. The Massachusetts ESE has selected both the 
ParaPro Assessment and the WorkKeys Certificate of 
Proficiency for Teacher Assistants as the formal state-
endorsed assessments. Either of these assessments will 
enable instructional paraprofessionals to meet this 
requirement. If this pathway is selected the 
paraprofessional should submit to the 
Principal/Headmaster an official score report confirming a 
passing score.  
II.  RESOURCES FOR PATHWAY 2 
Information about the ParaPro Assessment, including content 
overview, and registration can be accessed on-line at 
http://www.ets.org/parapro. The test is generally offered as a 
paper/pencil test given four times per year at Roxbury 
Community College. BPS does not currently administer the 
Internet-based ParaPro test. A scaled score of 464 must be 
achieved in order to pass and be deemed “Highly Qualified”. 
Information about the WorkKeys Proficiency Certificate for 
Teacher Assistants can be accessed on-line at 
http://www.act.org/workkeys/. It consists of a three-part 
assessment as well as an observation-based tool known as the 
Instructional Support Inventory (ISI). It is administered by 
WorkSource Partners, Inc., One Harvard Street, Ste 200, 
Brookline, MA  02445 (phone: 617-232-0330). To meet the 
requirements of ESSA, paraprofessionals must achieve at the 
following skill levels on the three-part assessment: 
● Reading for Information: Skill Level 5  


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 3 of 12 
 
● Applied Mathematics: Skill Level 4  
● Business Writing: Skill Level 3  
III. FEDERAL DEFINITIONS 
Definition of Instructional Paraprofessional  
An instructional paraprofessional is an individual who provides 
instruction and support for classroom teachers. Aides, assistants, 
or tutors who engage in instructional support are considered to 
be instructional paraprofessionals as defined by ESSA. Individuals 
who work solely in non-instructional roles, such as food service, 
cafeteria or playground supervision, personal care services, and 
non-instructional computer assistance are not considered to be 
instructional paraprofessionals. 
Responsibilities of Instructional Paraprofessionals  
ESEA specifies that instructional paraprofessionals may engage 
in the following activities:  
● Provide one-on-one tutoring for eligible students, if the 
tutoring is scheduled at a time when a student would not 
otherwise receive instruction from a teacher.  
● Assist with classroom management, such as organizing 
instructional and other materials. 
● Assist in a computer laboratory.  
● Provide instructional support in a library or media center.  
● Provide instructional services to students under the direct 
supervision of a teacher. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 4 of 12 
 
All instructional paraprofessionals must be supervised directly by 
teachers. Instructional paraprofessionals cannot be supervised by 
a peer or group of peers.  
The following two categories of paraprofessionals need only 
possess a high school diploma or equivalent and are not required 
to meet the additional requirements listed above: 
● Paraprofessionals in Title I programs who serve primarily as 
translators (as long as these paraprofessionals are proficient 
in English and a language other than English); and  
● Paraprofessionals working solely on parental involvement 
activities. 
Visit the Mass. DESE website for additional details.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Fax: 
617-635-7956 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 5 of 12 
 
ATTACHMENT A 
Massachusetts Department of Education Learning Guidelines 
for Title I Instructional Paraprofessionals 
The Department of Education strongly encourages districts and 
charter schools to use these guidelines as a model for all 
paraprofessionals who provide instructional support to students. 
BASIC ASSUMPTIONS 
● Instructional paraprofessionals are respected team 
members responsible for assisting in the delivery of 
instruction and other student-related activities. As valued 
members of the faculty, they are essential partners in the 
work of Title I programs. 
● Given their responsibilities, instructional paraprofessionals 
must be skilled in reading, writing, and mathematics, and 
familiar with instructional practices that ensure and 
support the achievement of all students. 
● To enhance the continuity and quality of services for 
students, paraprofessionals must be encouraged and 
supported in their efforts to participate in ongoing 
professional development programs. 
● Programs for instructional paraprofessionals are best when 
they are comprehensive, acknowledge the diverse roles 
paraprofessionals play in schools and provide pathways to 
further education and teacher licensure, if desired. 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 6 of 12 
 
1. LITERACY DOMAIN 
01 Language 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Use agreed-upon rules for informal and formal discussions 
in small and large groups 
● Pose questions, listen to the ideas of others, and contribute 
their own information or ideas in group discussions or 
interviews in order to acquire new knowledge 
● Understand new vocabulary and use it correctly in reading 
and writing 
● Analyze and use Standard English grammar 
● Describe, analyze, and use appropriately formal and 
informal English 
● Identify and use the correct meaning of words and phrases 
● Recognize and use words with multiple meanings 
● Use a paragraph or passage as the context for determining 
the meaning of an unfamiliar or uncommon word or phrase 
● Use dictionaries, thesauruses, and other related references 
02 Literature 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Identify the basic facts and main ideas in a text and use 
them as the basis for interpretation  
● Identify and paraphrase the main idea of a passage 
● Identify supporting evidence 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 7 of 12 
 
● Identify, organize, and draw conclusions using the 
relationship(s) among the ideas in written material 
● Identify, analyze, and apply knowledge of the theme, 
structure and elements of fiction and provide evidence 
from the text to support their understanding 
● Identify, analyze, and apply knowledge of the purposes, 
structure, and elements of nonfiction or informational 
materials and provide evidence from the text to support 
their understanding 
● Identify, analyze, and apply knowledge of the themes, 
structure, and elements of poetry and provide evidence 
from the text to support their understanding 
● Identify, analyze, and apply knowledge of the themes, 
structure, and elements of drama and provide evidence 
from the text to support their understanding 
● Identify and analyze how an author’s words appeal to the 
senses, create imagery, suggest mood, and set tone and 
provide evidence from the text to support their 
understanding 
03 Composition 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Write with a clear focus, coherent organization, and 
sufficient detail 
● Write for different audiences and purposes 
● Demonstrate adequate paragraph development and 
appropriate style, tone, and word choice in their 
compositions 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 8 of 12 
 
● Use standard English conventions in their writing, revising, 
and editing 
● Organize ideas in writing in a way that makes sense for 
their purpose 
● Gather information from a variety of sources, analyze, and 
evaluate the quality of the information they obtain, and use 
it to answer their own questions 
● Outline, summarize, and take notes 
● Interpret information presented in graphic form 
2. NUMERACY DOMAIN 
01 Number Sense 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Understand numbers, ways of representing numbers, 
relationships among numbers, and number systems 
● Understand principles and operations related to integers, 
fractions, decimals, percents, ratios, and proportions 
● Understand and solve problems involving integers, 
fractions, decimals, percents, ratios, and proportions 
● Understand meanings of mathematical operations and how 
they relate to one another. 
● Compute fluently and make reasonable estimates 
● Know how to use standard arithmetical algorithms 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 9 of 12 
 
02 Algebra 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Understand and use patterns to model and solve problems 
● Understand how to manipulate and simplify algebraic 
expressions and translate problems into algebraic notation 
● Understand the properties of different types of functions 
and relations 
03 Geometry 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Analyze characteristics and properties of two- and three-
dimensional geometric shapes 
● Specify locations and describe spatial relationships using 
coordinate geometry and other representational systems 
● Understand the principles and properties of coordinate and 
transformational geometry, apply transformations, and use 
symmetry to analyze mathematical situations 
● Use visualization, spatial reasoning, and geometric 
modeling to solve problems. 
04 Measurement and Data Analysis 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Identify measurable attributes of objects and use the 
standard units, systems, and processes of measurement 
● Formulate questions that can be addressed with data; and 
collect, organize, and display relevant data to answer them 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 10 of 12 
 
● Select and use appropriate statistical methods to analyze 
data 
● Develop and evaluate inferences and predictions that are 
based on data 
3. INSTRUCTION DOMAIN 
01 Curriculum Planning 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Assist with activities addressing standards that will advance 
students’ level of content knowledge 
● Assist with activities appropriate for the full range of 
students within a classroom and appropriate to the specific 
discipline, age, and level of proficiency with the English 
language and Individualized Education Programs (IEP) 
02 Effective Instruction 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Communicate lesson objectives clearly  
● Build on students’ prior knowledge and experience 
● Provide support under the guidance of a classroom teacher 
to address student needs 
● Help students use appropriate instructional resources to 
support learning in reading, writing, and mathematics 
● Help students use a variety of approaches to understand 
what they read 
● Help students focus their writing 
● Help students relate mathematics to everyday situations 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 11 of 12 
 
● Employ a variety and range of instructional techniques 
from direct instruction to cooperative learning groups 
● Use instructional technology appropriately 
● Provide regular feedback to students on their progress 
● Provide formal and informal assessment of student 
progress 
03 Classroom Climate and Equity 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Maintain appropriate standards of behavior, mutual 
respect, and safety in the classroom 
● Promote achievement for all students, including those with 
disabilities, those with limited English proficiency, and 
those who are gifted and talented, without exception 
● Promote civic and self-responsibility in the classroom, 
school, and community 
04 Professional Responsibilities 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Carry out their legal and ethical responsibilities. 
● Carry out health, safety, and emergency procedures of the 
learning environment. 
● Maintain high standards and expectations for all students. 
05 Professional Skills 
A paraprofessional will understand how and be able to: 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 12 of 12 
 
● Accept supervision to reflect critically upon their classroom 
experience and identify areas for further skill and 
professional development. 
● Work collaboratively with school personnel. 
● Confer with supervisor(s) and/or content specialist(s) when 
assistance is needed in supporting students’ learning 
process. 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PM06 
Version 01 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF MANAGERIAL EMPLOYEES 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Document Purpose 
Purpose of Performance Management 
Evaluation Process Overview 
The Five-Step Process 
Step 1: Self-Assessment 
Step 2: Analysis, Goal-Setting, and Analysis 
Step 3: Implementation of the Plan 
Step 4: Formative Assessment (Optional) 
Step 5: Summative Evaluation (June 1) 
 
Evaluation Platform and Documentation 
Timeline and Tools 
Appendix A: The Core Competencies 
Appendix B: Rating Levels 
DOCUMENT PURPOSE 
This document describes the performance management and 
evaluation process for managerial employees of Boston Public 
Schools (BPS), both Central Office and school-based. The 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 2 of 10 
 
purpose of this document is to provide clarity to employees and 
supervisors, as well as templates and tools for use during the 
process. This document was created as part of a cross-
departmental working group on central office performance 
management.  
 
PURPOSE OF PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT 
BPS students are the citizens, leaders, scholars, entrepreneurs, 
advocates, and innovators of tomorrow. As a district, we must 
ensure that 100 percent of our students are prepared for college, 
career, and life in the 21st century. We must model the district on 
the classroom we want to see. We have established a system of 
performance management to affirm the ideal that everyone, 
from students to the superintendent, must have sufficient 
resources, information, and support to achieve efficacy in their 
endeavors. 
The fundamental purpose of performance management in the 
BPS Central Office is to maximize the productivity and impact of 
our employees by enabling them to perform at their fullest 
potential. Our approach is designed to provide high-quality 
support to schools, students, and families in BPS to ensure our 
graduates are college, career, and life ready. To do so, our 
performance management system will: 
1. Establish a consistent set of competencies to clearly set and 
communicate expectations for employee performance 
2. Align employee efforts with department and organizational 
goals 
3. Create systems and structures that gather and monitor 
performance in order to support employee feedback, 
growth, and development 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 3 of 10 
 
4. Identify areas of strength to leverage for increased impact, 
and areas of growth for providing targeted support 
5. Provide accountability for individuals and enable them to 
see their contribution to and progress toward organizational 
goals 
6. Connect employee performance to incentives, recognition, 
professional growth, and retention efforts. 
EVALUATION PROCESS OVERVIEW 
The criteria for effective practice for Central Office managerial 
employees are identified in the Core Competencies, which 
defines six categories: 
1. Results Orientation 
2. Collaboration and Communication 
3. Job Knowledge and Skills 
4. Cultural Competency & Equitable Practices 
5. Responsiveness and Service Focus 
6. Leadership [for staff members supervising people or 
projects] 
See Appendix A for greater detail on the set of core 
competencies. 
Evaluations will result in ratings on an employee’s goals, on the 
six Core Competencies, and on overall performance, which will be 
based on the supervisor’s judgment of performance against the 
standards and progress toward goals. Progress toward goals will 
be rated as Goal Achieved, Goal Significantly Met, Active Goal, 
Goal Not Met, and Goal Deferred. Greater details on these rating 
levels can be found in Appendix B. 
The five levels of performance, which apply to performance on 
each competency and the Overall performance rating shall be:  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 4 of 10 
 
“Highly Effective”, “Effective”, “Developing,” “Minimally Effective,” 
and “Ineffective.” Greater details on these rating levels can be 
found in Appendix B. 
THE FIVE-STEP PROCESS 
Based on best practices in performance evaluation, BPS has 
adopted a five-step process for evaluation. This process should be 
followed each year by employees and supervisors. 
Five-Step Process Overview 
 
STEP 1: Self-Assessment (by September 1) 
Employee reviews available evidence of work performance, prior 
feedback and evaluations, and the Core Competencies to 
determine areas of strength and areas for further growth. The 
Self-Assessment is used to inform the employee’s goals and 
action plan for the upcoming year. 
STEP 2: Analysis, Goal-Setting, and Analysis (by October 1) 
Based on the employee’s self-assessment, job description, 
individual aspiration, and school/department goals, the employee 
and supervisor establish 2-4 goals, related to professional 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 5 of 10 
 
practice or performance: 
● A professional practice goal relates to an identified skill or 
set of knowledge that an employee wants to develop or 
improve. When developing a professional practice goal, 
employees and supervisors should both look at past 
performance and feedback, as well as the employee’s 
professional/career aspirations. Professional practice goals 
should align to one or more of the Core Competencies 
● A performance goal is a measurable target or outcome 
related to an employee’s work. Goals should align with an 
employee’s team and/or departmental goal(s). 
STEP 3: Implementation of the Plan (Ongoing) 
The employee performs job duties and responsibilities, 
implements the action steps toward goals, submits evidence 
supporting proficiency, and meets with their supervisor to 
receive and discuss feedback. The supervisor collects and reviews 
evidence, provides ongoing, timely, clear, and actionable 
feedback, and meets with the employee to give and discuss 
feedback, including recommendations for improvement, if 
applicable. 
STEP 4: Formative Assessment (Optional or By February 1) 
Each employee should receive a Formative Assessment to 
provide the employee with written feedback on their 
performance against the Core Competencies and their progress 
toward goals. Typically, the formative will occur midway through 
the assessment year, though it may take place at other times for 
individuals in need of additional support. 
Professional Development Plans are implemented when an 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 6 of 10 
 
employee’s performance is rated Minimally Effective under one 
or more competencies, or overall. They are meant to include 
increased supervision and support for improvement in specific 
areas identified by the supervisor. 
Performance Improvement Plans (PIPs) are implemented when 
an employee’s performance is rated Ineffective under one or 
more competencies, or overall. They are more highly directed 
plans that are typically followed by another evaluation and may 
result in employment action if performance is not sufficiently 
improved. 
STEP 5: Summative Evaluation (June 1) 
Each employee shall receive a Summative Evaluation to provide 
the employee with written feedback and ratings of their 
performance and progress toward goals. 
 
EVALUATION PLATFORM AND DOCUMENTATION 
Managerial employee performance evaluations and related 
documentation are generated and stored in the BPS online 
performance management platform, VectorEvals. Employees 
and supervisors will receive training in accessing, navigating, and 
using the platform prior to the start of their evaluation cycle. 
Training modules will be available in an online, on-demand 
format to employees and supervisors for reference, as well. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 7 of 10 
 
TIMELINE 
Date 
Activity 
July - August 
● Office, team, and individual goal-setting begins 
● Supervisors review of standards and expectations with employees 
September 1 
● Employee Self-Assessments due 
● Employee Goals & Action Plans draft due 
October 1 
● Finalized Employee Goals & Action Plans due 
Ongoing 
● Employee check-ins, at the discretion of supervisor 
● Provide feedback (verbal and written) to employees on progress toward 
goals, observed performance, and work products/artifacts. 
● Implementation also includes peer feedback. 
January  
● Formative Assessment meetings with employees (Optional) 
February 1 
● Formative Assessments finalized and submitted (Optional) 
May 21 - 25 
● Last day to submit artifacts for review prior to Summative Evaluation 
June 1 
● Summative Evaluations finalized and submitted 
 
APPENDIX A: CORE COMPETENCIES (LINK TO SEPARATE 
DOCUMENT) 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 8 of 10 
 
APPENDIX B: OVERALL EFFECTIVENESS LEVELS (BELOW) 
Effectiveness 
Level 
Description 
Highly Effective 
Performance far exceeded expectations due to exceptionally high 
quality of work performed in all essential areas of responsibility, 
resulting in an overall quality of work that was superior; and either 
included the completion of a major goal or project, or 
made an exceptional or unique contribution in support of team, 
department, or district objectives. 
This level is achievable by any employee though given infrequently 
(<10% of employees) 
Effective 
Performance met expectations in all essential areas of responsibility, 
and the quality of work overall was excellent. Annual goals were met. 
Developing 
Performance consistently met expectations in all essential areas of 
responsibility, at times possibly exceeding expectations, and the quality 
of work overall was very good. The most critical annual goals were 
met. 
This level is expected for individuals who are new to the organization 
or to a role. 
Minimally Effective Performance did not consistently meet expectations – performance 
failed to meet expectations in one or more essential areas of 
responsibility, and/or one or more of the most critical goals were not 
met.  A professional development plan (not necessarily a PIP) to 
improve performance must be implemented, including timelines, and 
monitored to measure progress. 
Ineffective 
Performance was consistently below expectations in most essential 
areas of responsibility, and/or reasonable progress toward critical goals 
was not made. Significant improvement is needed in one or more 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 9 of 10 
 
Effectiveness 
Level 
Description 
important areas. A Performance Improvement Plan (PIP) to correct 
performance, including timelines, must be outlined and monitored to 
measure progress. 
 
Goal Status Scale 
Goal Status 
Description 
Goal Achieved: 
All goal milestones and success measures have been achieved for 
100% of goals. 
Goal Significantly 
Met: 
All goal milestones and success measures have been achieved for at 
least 85% of goal. 
Active Goal: 
The goal is still in progress, though some milestones may have been 
achieved. 
Goal Not Met: 
For this goal, some or all milestones and success measures have not 
been met. 
Goal Deferred: 
For timing or organizational reasons, this goal has been deferred. 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM06 
Page 10 of 10 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Evaluation and Performance Management 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Boston, MA 02119 
 
 
Email: 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org 
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
HRS-PP06 
Version 01 
 
 
CONFIDENTIALITY OF PERSONNEL RECORDS AND 
EMPLOYMENT VERIFICATIONS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
State laws and regulations regulate disclosure of information 
collected about personnel by the Boston Public Schools. These 
laws and regulations provide that, with some exceptions such as 
personnel and medical records, the School Department's records 
must be available for public inspection. State law further provides 
that individuals may review and challenge information in the files 
concerning them. 
PERSONNEL RECORDS 
The Office of Human resources maintains both publicly available 
and confidential files about each employee. The Office of Human 
resources will disclose allowable information when requested to 
do so in writing.  
Please note that the following are public records, which will be 
released upon receipt of a written request: 
● Names  
● Other materials or data relating to a specifically named 
individual, the release of which would not publicize intimate 
details of a highly personal nature.   


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP06 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
 
Confidential information is not released, such as social security 
numbers, home addresses and phone numbers, transcripts, 
medical forms, and evaluations.  
Only an employee may view their entire file unless a court order 
or other legal mandates require otherwise. An employee may 
view their file in the Office of Human resources by appointment 
only. To schedule an appointment, place an HR Inquiry request 
via the Beacon. This can be found for internal employees by 
navigating to Access.Boston.gov. 
To obtain a copy of your personnel card for the City of Boston 
Retirement Board, please place an HR inquiry request via the 
Beacon. This can be found for internal employees by navigating 
to Access.Boston.gov. Any former employee will need to submit a 
request via email at ohr@bostonpublicschools.org. 
EMPLOYMENT VERIFICATION 
All inquiries regarding employees, employment status, and other 
such information must be directed to the Office of Human 
resources, where official personnel records are maintained.  
If an employee is seeking employment verification (mortgage, 
housing, substitute time, standard verification, etc.), they should 
create an HR Inquiry request via Beacon. An employee must scan 
and attach the verification to the HR Inquiry submission.  If an 
employee needs an email address to submit to their potential 
mortgage company, housing office or any other loan provider, 
they should provide the OHR email ohr@bostonpublicschools.org 
or fax a request to 617-635-7957. Please note that requests for 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP06 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
employment verification are processed in the order they are 
received and take between 5 and 10 business days to complete. If 
salary/payroll information is needed, it can take longer than 5-10 
business days. Please plan accordingly. 
Any subpoenas for records should be directed to the Office of the 
Legal Advisor, 2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119.  
LICENSURE RELATED EMPLOYMENT VERIFICATIONS 
All educators and other employees seeking licensure related 
verification must complete the BPS Educator Licensure 
Verification Requests form. 
For loan forgiveness requests, please submit an HR Inquiry with 
forms attached on the Beacon via Access.Boston.gov. All former 
employees must email ohr@bostonpublicschools.org and include 
any supporting documentation. 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP06 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Shared Services 
Department: 
Office of Human resources 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Fax: 
617-635-7956 
Additional 
Questions: 
For additional questions, please submit an HR 
Inquiry Ticket via the Beacon. This can be 
found on Access Boston (access.boston.gov). 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
HRS-PP16 
Version 01 
 
 
EMPLOYEE SAVINGS AND INVESTMENT BENEFITS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
FLEXIBLE SPENDING ACCOUNT 
The City of Boston’s Flexible Spending Accounts are administered 
by Cafeteria Plan Advisors, Inc. Flex spending lets you deduct pre-
tax money for out-of-pocket medical expenses, dependent care, 
and transportation. Annual enrollment for flex spending occurs in 
November for the plan year beginning January 1. Participants of 
this program will receive a Benny Card at the start of the new 
year that they can begin using immediately for eligible expenses. 
● Read more about Flexible Spending 
● Download the Flexible Spending Application 
● Cafeteria Plan Advisors, Inc. website 
 
To contact Cafeteria Plan Advisors directly with questions:  
Mailing Address:   420 Washington Street, Suite 100, Braintree, 
MA 02184 
Phone:   
1-800-544-2340 
FAX:       
1-781-848-8477 
Email:    
info@cpa125.com 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP16 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
RETIREMENT PLANNING 
State-Boston Retirement System 
All employees are eligible to participate in the State Boston 
Retirement System. For more information, visit the Retirement 
Board website. 
Voluntary Retirement Plans 
Employees are eligible to participate in two types of voluntary 
deferred compensation retirement plans: 
• Massachusetts Deferred Comp 457 SMART Plan 
• 403(b) tax-sheltered annuities   
See information below on these two types of voluntary deferred 
compensation plans.   
DEFERRED COMPENSATION 
1. 457 SMART Plan 
Employees are eligible to participate in the 
Commonwealth’s Deferred Compensation Plan (also known 
as a Section 457 Plan). This allows an employee to shelter 
income from federal and state income tax through a payroll 
deduction. Additional information is available at the 
Massachusetts Deferred Compensation Smart Plan website. 
Click here for more information Deferred Compensation (IRS 
457). 
2. 403(b) Plans 
Employees are eligible to participate, at no cost, in tax-
sheltered annuities (also known as 403(b) plans). An annuity 
is a tax-saving retirement planning device that allows an 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP16 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
employee to shelter income from federal and state income 
tax through a payroll deduction. A representative at a 
participating company will provide a payroll deduction form, 
which you may also download and print out here. This form 
must be filled out and submitted according to BPS 403(b) 
procedures. 
o AIG/VALIC (Variable Annuity Life Insurance Co.), 
Nashua, NH. (603) 594-8340 
o American United Life Insurance Company 
o Ameriprise Financial Services, Inc., Minneapolis, MN 
(800) 862-7919 
o Ameritas Life Insurance Corporation, Lincoln, NE (800) 
745-1112 
o ASPire Financial Services, Tampa, FL (866) 634-5873 
o AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company, Wellesley, MA 
(781) 237-8264 
o Commonwealth Annuity and Life Ins. Co., Topeka, KS 
(800) 457-9047 
o Fidelity Investments Mutual Funds 
o Great American Advisors, Inc., Cincinnati, OH (800) 216-
3354 
o Great American Financial Resources, Inc., Cincinnati, 
OH (888) 497-8556 
o Horace Mann, Springfield, IL (866) 999-1945 
o Kemper Annuity and Life Ins. Co., Topeka, KS (800) 457-
9047 
o Lincoln Investment Planning Mutual Funds, Waltham, 
MA (781) 647-3050 
o Lincoln National Life Insurance Company, Fort Wayne, 
IN (800) 454-6265 
o MetLife, Bloomfield, CT (860) 768-0139 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP16 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
o MetLife of CT, Bloomfield, CT (860) 768-0139 
o Midland National Life 
o North American Company for Life and Health 
o New York Life Insurance Company, Sleepy Hollow, NY 
(914) 846-5608 
o Protective Life, Topeka, KS (800) 457-9047 
o The Union Central Life Ins. Co., Cincinnati, OH (800) 
825-1551 
VOLUNTARY INSURANCE 
Other insurance providers offer short and long-term disability. 
They also offer optional life insurance and critical illness coverage.  
These are voluntary insurance programs. Please be advised that 
these benefits are not administered by the Health Benefits Office. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Employee Services, Office Human Resources 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
employeeservices@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PM05 
Version 01 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF MEMBERS OF THE 
LUNCH HOUR MONITORS ASSOCIATION 
The contract between the School Committee and the Lunch 
Monitors Association provides for both annual and interim 
evaluations of the performance of all employees represented by 
the Association. The evaluation process relates to the duties and 
responsibilities of the employee’s position, as set forth in the 
employee’s job description. 
I. 
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
The principal/head or school or assistant principal shall be 
responsible for the evaluation of the performance of all lunch 
hour monitors. 
A supervisor’s failure to address the job performance problems of 
their staff through the performance evaluation process 
represents unacceptable performance for which the supervisor 
will be held accountable. 
Further, a supervisor will also be performing unsatisfactorily if an 
underperforming staff member is given a satisfactory rating and 
then encouraged to transfer to another school or department. A 
supervisor who does this will be held accountable as part of their 
performance evaluation. 
At the end of each evaluation year, the Evaluator should retain 
copies of all evaluations and send the originals of all evaluations 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM05 
Page 2 of 10 
 
to the Office of Human Resources. 
II. 
EVALUATION 
Preliminary Procedures 
At a reasonable time period after the start of the school year, the 
principal/assistant principal shall meet with the lunch hour 
monitors for the purpose of explaining the evaluation program 
and answering questions. The evaluation instrument will be 
reviewed during this meeting. 
After the evaluation has been presented to the employee, the 
signed evaluation form must be submitted to the Office of 
Human Resources.  
Interim Evaluations 
All lunch hour monitors shall receive an Interim evaluation at 
least once, or as required for the efficient running of the school. 
All interim evaluations should be conducted no earlier than 
February 1st each year. 
Annual Evaluations 
Annual evaluations must be completed no later than the last day 
of school each year. 
Evaluation Completion 
Every interim and annual evaluation must result in a mark for 
each appropriate item on the evaluation form. In any area where 
the supervisor indicates a need for improvement, they will 
provide the evaluee with a written prescription. The diagnosis 
and subsequent prescription should be fully descriptive and 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM05 
Page 3 of 10 
 
instructive, suggesting specific remedies or recommendations 
for adoption by the evaluee. 
Evaluation Conference 
Within ten (10) school days following the completion of an 
evaluation, the evaluator shall meet with the evaluee for the 
purpose of discussing the evaluation. At this meeting, the 
evaluee will be shown their written evaluation and will sign it to 
indicate having seen it and to acknowledge that it will be placed 
in their personnel file, but not to indicate agreement or 
disagreement with the evaluation results. 
A copy of the evaluation shall be provided to the evaluee. The 
evaluee will be allowed to attach their comments to the 
evaluation. An evaluee whose overall performance has been 
judged unsatisfactory shall be notified in writing and shall meet 
directly with the evaluator.1 
III. RATINGS 
The performance evaluation process should provide each 
employee with an appraisal of their strengths and identify areas 
in need of improvement. The employee will be evaluated on each 
standard within the various categories. There are three possible 
ratings: 
 
E - EXCELLENT: 
The employee’s performance of the duties and 
responsibilities of their position exceeds 
 
1 See Section V: Procedures for Unsatisfactory Evaluations for 
more information on this process. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM05 
Page 4 of 10 
 
expectations. 
S - SATISFACTORY: 
The employee’s performance of the duties and 
responsibilities of their position meets expectations. 
U - UNSATISFACTORY: The employee has failed to meet expectations and 
their performance of the duties and responsibilities of 
their position needs improvement. 
IV. PROCEDURES FOR UNSATISFACTORY EVALUATIONS 
If an evaluee receives an annual overall Unsatisfactory evaluation, 
plus an interim Unsatisfactory evaluation, the supervisor may 
initiate termination by recommending to the Superintendent 
that such employee be terminated. 
If the first evaluation is Unsatisfactory, it will be followed by a 
second evaluation no less than twenty-five (25) days in which the 
lunch monitor is present and no more than fifty (50) days in 
which the lunch monitor is present. 
If the second evaluation is Unsatisfactory, the lunch monitor will 
be given ten (10) school days to improve their performance. 
During these ten (10) school days following the second 
evaluation, the evaluator must informally evaluate the lunch 
monitor, but is not required to formally observe the employee or 
make any record of this evaluation. 
Should the lunch monitor’s performance not improve within the 
ten (10) days following an Unsatisfactory second evaluation, the 
monitor may be recommended for dismissal to the 
superintendent. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM05 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
V. PROCEDURES FOR DISCIPLINE 
If an Evaluator determines that an employee has committed an 
infraction of work rules such as excessive tardiness, absences, 
etc., the supervisor should follow the procedures outlined in the 
Superintendent's Circular on Employee Discipline Procedures.2 
Additionally, the supervisor should consider the infraction in 
evaluating the evaluee’s overall performance. 
 
 
 
2 Also refer to Superintendent Circular (HRS-PP10) Employee 
Discipline Procedures. at this link: 
www.bostonpublicschools.org/domain/1884  
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM05 
Page 6 of 10 
 
VI. Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
Shortly after the start of a 
school year 
Review job description and evaluation instrument. 
Sign cover page to acknowledge meeting 
No later than Feb. 1 
Complete first Interim evaluation; to be conducted 
no earlier than 15 school days after the start of the 
school year. 
No later than the last day of 
school 
Deadline to complete annual evaluation. Send 
signed, original copies of evaluations to:  
Bruce C. Bolling Municipal Building 
Office of Human Resources 
Attn: HRFront Desk 
2300 Washington Street, 4th floor 
Roxbury, MA 02119 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM05 
Page 7 of 10 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Evaluation and Performance Management 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Boston, MA 02119 
Email: 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org  
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM05 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION FOR LUNCH HOUR MONITORS 
Name _______________________________ Empl ID# 
  
School ___________________________________________________________ 
Evaluator ________________________________________________________  
 
Permanent 
 
Provisional 
 
Substitute 
 
Last Overall Rating ______        
    E= Excellent     S= Satisfactory   U= Unsatisfactory            
 
 
Evaluation procedure and form reviewed on (Date): ______________ 
Acknowledged (Evaluator): ______________________________________ 
Acknowledged (Lunch Monitor): _________________________________ 
Category (check the applicable rating box for each 
category) 
E 
S 
U 
Maintains safety and order during lunch and recess. 
 
 
 
Maintains appropriate schedule for lunch and recess. 
 
 
 
Performs ordinary school tasks as directed and performs the work 
accurately. 
 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM05 
Page 9 of 10 
 
Category (check the applicable rating box for each 
category) 
E 
S 
U 
Comes to work on time and maintains good attendance. 
 
 
 
Works productively during all scheduled work hours and continues 
work in the absence of supervision. 
 
 
 
Knows the work and organizes appropriately. 
 
 
 
Uses good judgment. 
 
 
 
Abides by rules and regulations and complies with oral and written 
instructions. 
 
 
 
Communicates effectively and in a constructive way with students 
and the school's staff. 
 
 
 
Works harmoniously with others and maintains a high level of 
professionalism. 
 
 
 
Treats students with respect, fairness, and consistency. 
 
 
 
Accepts constructive criticism. 
 
 
 
Overall Rating: 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________     _________________ 
 
Evaluator’s Signature 
Date 
 
_______________________________________________     _________________ 
 
Lunch Hour Monitor’s Signature 
Date 
 
Evaluator’s Comments: 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM05 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Evaluee’s Comments: 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
HRS-PP07 
Version 01 
 
 
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION PROCEDURES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
OBJECTIVE 
The Boston Public Schools Workers’ Compensation Service is 
located within Boston City Hall, 6th Floor, Room 613. Workers’ 
Compensation Service administers benefits for city workers, 
including Boston Public Schools employees. The Workers’ 
Compensation Service strives to ensure effective and efficient 
delivery of benefits and collects injury data for state and federal 
reporting requirements. 
ADMINISTERING WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BENEFITS 
For the City of Boston Workers’ Compensation Service to provide 
adequate service, it is imperative that all work-related injuries be 
reported as soon as possible, preferably within twenty-four hours 
of the occurrence. 
For the Workers’ Compensation Service to provide timely 
benefits, your cooperation in obtaining medical documentation is 
critical. If a case is reported late, or if the Workers’ Compensation 
Service does not have sufficient medical documentation, the 
employee’s receipt of benefits may be delayed. 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP07 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
► It is the employee’s responsibility to request complete 
medical treatment records for the work-related injury 
and provide them or have them sent to the Workers’ 
Compensation Service. Out-of-work notes are NOT 
sufficient to maintain workers’ compensation benefits. 
Incomplete or late reports of injury could also subject Boston 
Public Schools to financial penalties. 
● To find the City’s accident report form, as well as a 
complete guide to the city’s workers’ compensation 
process, please see the City of Boston Workers’ 
Compensation Service employee guide at 
https://www.boston.gov/departments/human-
resources/workers-compensation-process.  
● The accident report can be accessed directly at 
https://www.boston.gov/sites/default/files/file/2022/02/
accident-report-form_2-7-2022.pdf.  
STEPS TO TAKE IF YOU HAVE BEEN INJURED IN THE COURSE OF 
YOUR EMPLOYMENT 
If emergency services (i.e., life threatening, bleeding, head 
injuries, severe fractures, etc.) are necessary:  
1. Seek out emergency care (via ambulance if necessary) at 
the closest emergency care facility to where you were 
injured. 
2. Fill out and sign the accident report form. Submit it to the 
workers’ compensation office and your supervisor or human 
resources representative in your department. If you are 
unable to fill it out, you can have someone else fill it out for 
you. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP07 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
3. Medical documentation must be sent to Workers’ 
Compensation Services (Room 613).  
4. A supervisor’s signature is requested solely for the purpose 
of notification that an injury occurred. A supervisor’s 
signature does not indicate that the supervisor 
agrees/disagrees with the report, nor does it indicate the 
supervisor witnessed the accident. 
5. Reasonable and necessary medical expenses for accepted 
work-related injuries will be covered by Workers’ 
Compensation Service, regardless of whether time has been 
lost due to the injury. However, salary replacement benefits 
for accepted work-related injuries are given only if the 
employee lost 5 days or more. Substantial medical 
documentation is required for employees who have lost 5 
days or more. 
6. A representative from Workers’ Compensation will contact 
you to follow up on your injury. They will also explain your 
benefits and discuss your medical treatment. If you haven’t 
heard back within seven (7) days of reporting your injury, 
you can speak with a case manager by calling 617-635-3193 
or emailing workerscompstaff@boston.gov. 
 WHILE ON WORKERS’ COMPENSATION 
While on workers’ compensation, the employee must maintain 
an approved leave of absence status with the Office of Human 
resources by applying for a leave of absence on the HUB and 
providing a WH-380-E form or medical 
certification/documentation on official letterhead from a health 
care provider. For more information on leaves of absence, please 
see Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP07 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
While on workers’ compensation, the employee is permitted to 
use available sick, personal, or vacation time to supplement the 
difference in workers’ compensation earnings to continue to 
receive 100% of their normal earnings. This applies to employees 
who have available time and have completed the Workers' 
Compensation Earnings Consent Form, allowing the use of 
earned time. Without consent, the Office of Human resources will 
not supplement your workers’ compensation earnings. The 
consent form can be accessed directly at: 
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSf0E_fnOzpBy2kNdqn
HyXIvlVzzziCmSsIE0pM74H4kMoCwow/viewform.  
Supplementing your WC earnings allows employees to maintain 
their normal deductions (retirement, union dues, health 
insurance, etc.). For some unions, it also minimizes the impact of 
earnings that are normally paid over the summer. To be sure of 
the financial impact that supplementing (or not supplementing) 
your WC earnings will have your pay once you return to work, 
please reach out to the BPS Payroll team at 617-635-9460. 
Employees are permitted up to 1 year of leave for an injury related 
to an approved Workers’ Compensation injury. Employees who 
are absent more than 1 year may have an essential functions 
meeting held to determine whether they are able to continue 
their employment with BPS. 
EMPLOYEE RETURNING TO WORK 
An employee who is ready to return to work after having been 
out due to a work-related injury must have medical clearance 
from their doctor. Before returning to work, the employee must 
provide copies of the medical clearance note to both OHR and 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP07 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
the Workers’ Compensation Service and inform both offices of 
their intent to return and the intended date. The clearance note 
should be emailed to OHRLeaves@bostonpublicschools.org as 
well as workerscompstaff@boston.gov.  
Transitional modified work may be offered by the Boston Public 
Schools to employees who have been injured on the job and can 
return to work on a modified basis. The Boston Public Schools 
makes reasonable accommodations in compliance with the ADA 
and M.G.L. c. 151B for employees with handicaps or disabilities, as 
outlined in Superintendent's Circular EQT-01. If you wish to seek 
reasonable accommodations, please contact the Office of Equity 
at 617-635-9650 or accommodations@bostonpublicschools.org to 
engage in an interactive dialogue prior to your return.  
The goals of the Workers’ Compensation office are to ensure that 
eligible injured employees receive quality and timely medical 
services, receive timely benefits, and return to the job as quickly 
as possible. Your case manager will remain in constant contact 
with you, and you will be required to maintain contact and 
provide the necessary medical information to your case manager 
so that these goals can be achieved. 
All accident reports regarding an employee’s injury should be 
forwarded to Workers’ Compensation Services (address at the 
bottom of this circular). 
Any additional information or questions can be forwarded to the 
employee’s case manager. Case managers are assigned based on 
the employee’s last name. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP07 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
MEDICAL TREATMENT INFORMATION FOR ALL EMPLOYEES 
REGARDING WORKERS’ COMPENSATION  
If you need medical care for your work injury or illness, contact a 
medical provider. Let them know that you are seeking workers’ 
compensation coverage for the treatment. The city currently 
does not have any preferred medical providers. 
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION CHECKLIST 
As this circular is comprehensive, and to prevent delays in 
processing, please ensure that you have completed the following 
action items when applying for/returning from workers' 
compensation. 
APPLYING FOR WORKERS’ COMPENSATION 
● Complete and submit the Report of Occupational Injury or 
Accident. This report should be verified and signed by your 
supervisor. 
● Review Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 Absence and 
Leave Policy. 
● Complete a leave of absence application form and submit 
WH-380-E form or physician’s certificate.  
● Send medical updates to both the City of Boston Workers’ 
Compensation Unit and the Office of Human resources to 
maintain your leave of absence and workers' compensation 
benefits.  
● If applicable, complete the workers' compensation 
supplemental earnings consent form if you wish to 
supplement your benefit with accrued time. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP07 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
RETURNING FROM WORKERS’ COMPENSATION 
● Send both Human resources and City of Boston Workers' 
Compensation Unit medical documentation certifying the 
ability to return to work with/without restrictions. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Department: 
Workers’ Compensation Service  
Mailing Address: 
Boston City Hall, Room 613, Boston, MA 02201 
Phone: 
617-635-3193 
Fax: 
617-635-3119 
 
For submitting forms to the Office of Human resources: 
Owner: 
Employee Services 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources  
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9255 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
OHRleaves@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PM02 
Version 01 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF INSTRUCTIONAL 
BASAS ADMINISTRATORS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version.. 
Heads of school, principals, and other administrative heads are 
responsible for evaluating the performance of administrators 
under their direct supervision. This employee group is school-
based, requires DESE licensure, and is represented as part of the 
BASAS bargaining unit. Instructional BASAS administrators will 
be evaluated using the VectorEvals platform as the evaluation 
instrument. As of September 2023, non-instructional BASAS 
administrators in roles that do not require DESE-licensure will be 
evaluated using Superintendent Circular HRS-PM02A 
Performance Evaluation of Non-Instructional BASAS 
Administrators. 
The purpose of this memorandum is to explain who is 
responsible for evaluation and to outline the philosophy, 
objectives, guidelines, and procedures applicable to that process. 
PHILOSOPHY 
The Boston Public Schools and the BASAS bargaining unit 
recognize that the quality of education provided depends upon 
the professional performance and the total job effectiveness of 
the teachers and administrators in the system.  Thus, since the 
system's professionals can and should be held accountable for 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 2 of 10 
 
the quality of their performance, a just and effective process for 
evaluating that performance is essential. Such a process must be 
organized to: 
• foster effective leadership in promoting improvements of 
schools and educational programs 
• develop in the professional staff a clearer understanding of 
the goals of education 
• promote sound organizational and management 
procedures 
• demonstrate active support of the policies of the School 
Committee and superintendent. 
The performance evaluation program to be implemented to 
satisfy this philosophy for administrators is diagnostic and 
prescriptive, is generally positively directed, and encourages 
professionals to maximize unique strengths and skills. 
All instructional BASAS administrators whose evaluations are 
subject to 603 CMR 35.00, et. seq. (i.e., administrators whose roles 
require DESE licensure) shall be evaluated on a cycle consistent 
with those regulations. Evaluees not subject to 603 CMR 35.00 et. 
seq. shall be evaluated annually, except that such employees 
need not be evaluated in the following year if they remain in the 
same job title and position unless the evaluator determines a 
need to do so. 
INSTRUMENTS/EVALUATORS 
A. Instructional BASAS members shall be evaluated by a 
designee of the superintendent outside the BASAS 
bargaining unit. 
B. The evaluation instrument to be used for instructional 
BASAS administrators in DESE-licensed roles as of 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 3 of 10 
 
September 2019 is known as VectorEvals. It is accessible via 
the employee’s BPS Google account. Comprehensive 
information pertaining to the performance evaluation of 
instructional BASAS administrators under the 2011 education 
regulation amendments (603 CMR 35.00) is now located at 
the Office of Human Resources website: 
https://www.bostonpublicschools.org/Page/8586. 
 
PROCEDURAL STEPS 
A. Preparation - No later than 30 days after the start of a rating 
year, and no later than 45 days after a change in a person’s 
evaluator, the person’s evaluator shall meet with the 
evaluee(s) for the purpose of explaining the diagnostic 
prescriptive evaluation program, reviewing the evaluation 
instrument and which parts of it may not be applicable, 
answering questions, and determining additional job 
related responsibilities which will be covered in the 
evaluation. Within 5 days after said meeting, the evaluee will 
receive a copy of a list of job related functions for which they 
are responsible and on which their performance will be 
evaluated. 
The evaluee may propose a professional practice goal as 
well as a student learning goal. All goals are subject to the 
approval of the evaluator. 
B. Data Gathering - It should be clearly understood by the 
evaluee that the data gathering process is ongoing and 
cumulative.  Evaluation data includes information gathered 
by observation or other means. Data should be collected 
over a sufficient period and should be accessible to the 
evaluee in compliance with applicable state and federal 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 4 of 10 
 
laws. All complaints or derogatory comments obtained from 
parents, community, etc., shall be promptly provided to the 
instructional BASAS member, or they may not be used as a 
basis for evaluation. 
The evaluator must provide feedback within five school days 
to the evaluee (via email or in person) after any observation 
or collection of evidence that results in the evaluator having 
a concern that one or more standards may be rated as 
unsatisfactory or needs improvement on a formative or 
summative evaluation for the first time. 
C. Post-Evaluation Conference - Evaluation reports may be 
filled out periodically throughout the school year whenever 
an evaluator determines that assistance, supervision, or 
intervention is deemed appropriate. Within ten (10) school 
days during which the BASAS member is present following 
the completion of each evaluation, the evaluator shall meet 
with the evaluee for the purpose of discussing the 
evaluation, providing an appraisal of professional strengths 
and areas in need of improvement. 
In any area where the evaluator indicates a need for 
improvement, or that the evaluee is “Unsatisfactory”, the 
evaluator will provide the evaluee with a written 
prescription. The prescription must be fully descriptive, 
instructive, reasonable, attainable, and educationally sound 
as to the specific remedy sought by the evaluator. 
At the post-evaluation conference, the evaluee will be 
shown their written evaluation by the evaluator and will sign 
it to indicate they have seen it and acknowledge that it will 
be placed in their personnel file, but not to indicate 
agreement or disagreement. A copy of the evaluation will be 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 5 of 10 
 
provided to the evaluee, and the evaluee will be allowed to 
attach comments to the evaluation. 
D. Follow-Up - In general, the number and scope of the 
subsequent conferences can be gauged at the first post-
evaluation conference and should be communicated to and 
discussed with the evaluee at the end of that conference. 
FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT/EVALUATION AND OBSERVATIONAL 
FEEDBACK 
A. A formative assessment shall be a part of the process used 
to assess progress towards attaining goals set forth in 
administrator plans, performance on Standards and 
Indicators of Effective Teaching Practice, or both, and may 
be used to inform employment decisions. This process may 
take place at any time during the cycle of evaluation, but 
typically takes place at mid-cycle. 
B. A formative evaluation shall be an evaluation conducted at 
the end of Year 1 for an administrator on a two-year self-
directed growth plan. This evaluation is to be used to arrive 
at a rating on progress towards attaining the goals set forth 
in the evaluee’s plan, performance on Standards and 
Indicators of Effective Teaching Practice, or both, and may 
be used to inform employment decisions. 
C. If an evaluee’s performance results in a rating of “Needs 
Improvement,” or “Unsatisfactory” on a formative 
assessment or evaluation, the evaluation prescription may 
contain a requirement that an administrator take advantage 
of additional professional development training or other 
opportunities. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 6 of 10 
 
SUMMATIVE EVALUATION AND REPORTS 
A. A summative evaluation is an evaluation used to arrive at a 
rating on each standard, an overall rating, and as a basis to 
make personnel decisions. The summative evaluation 
includes the evaluator’s judgments of the evaluee’s 
performance against performance standards and the 
evaluee’s attainment of goals set forth in the evaluee’s plan. 
B. During the entire evaluation process, continuous assistance, 
support, and encouragement should be extended to assist 
the evaluee in meeting established objectives. 
C. Continued failure to achieve an overall rating of “Proficient” 
will result in additional prescriptions, warnings, additional 
evaluations, and further personnel action, including 
evaluation visits from other School Department 
administrators. 
D. An evaluee whose overall performance has been judged as 
“Needs Improvement” or “Unsatisfactory” shall be notified in 
writing and shall meet directly with the evaluator. 
DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
A. An overall rating of “Unsatisfactory” on a summative 
evaluation for BASAS members shall be subject to the 
grievance and arbitration procedure. An administrator may 
grieve a summative rating of “Proficient” evaluation up to 
and including the level of the responsible administrator 
above the level of the evaluator. Any evaluation that is used 
or referred to as any part of the rationale for removal, 
reassignment, or any other negative action against an 
employee shall be subject to the grievance and arbitration 
procedures. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 7 of 10 
 
B. Any evaluation of an instructional BASAS administrator 
which is overall “Unsatisfactory” shall be promptly 
forwarded to BASAS along with any other recommended 
professional development or corrective action plan, 
provided that the BASAS member has so requested in 
writing. The superintendent’s designee and BASAS agree to 
meet to discuss the plan, when requested by the BASAS 
member. 
C. Alleged violations of the performance evaluation process are 
subject to the grievance and arbitration procedures if the 
employee has been dismissed. 
PROCEDURES FOR DISMISSAL/DEMOTION 
If the performance evaluation of an evaluee results in a 
recommendation for dismissal/demotion by the evaluator 
(confirmed by the head of school or other senior administrator), 
the following procedures will be followed: 
A. The superintendent's designee shall discuss each 
recommendation for dismissal with the appropriate 
evaluator and/or other senior administrator.  The 
superintendent's designee shall then undertake the 
necessary investigation to substantiate the evaluation of the 
administrator. 
Based on the above, the superintendent or their designee 
shall decide on the appropriateness of the recommendation 
for dismissal/demotion.  The evaluator and/or other senior 
administrator must present supporting documents to the 
Superintendent or their designee when presenting a 
recommendation for dismissal. 
B. The superintendent or their designee or senior 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 8 of 10 
 
administrator shall submit all processed recommendations 
for dismissal to the Office of Labor Relations. 
C. The decisions of the superintendent or their designee shall 
be confined to the following: 
1. Retention - This is a rejection of the recommendation 
of the evaluator based on the evidence presented on 
an individual administrator. 
2. Notice - The superintendent's designee, having 
reviewed the materials, decides that the case does not 
warrant a recommendation for dismissal/demotion, 
but instead warrants placing the administrator on 
notice that their performance is highly unacceptable.  
This status stands as a final warning that the 
administrator will be subject to additional evaluation 
during the academic year and, if performance is not 
improved, may be subject to dismissal/demotion. 
3. Dismissal/Demotion - This recommendation is the 
affirmation of the evidence presented by the evaluator. 
The evaluee may call for a hearing before the 
superintendent or designee thirty days after written 
notification to the administrator of the 
recommendation for dismissal/demotion. 
D. The Office of Labor Relations shall: (1) evaluate the evidence 
for dismissal/demotion; (2) review the recommendation, if 
necessary, with the evaluator and/or superintendent or their 
designee; and (3) determine that relevant procedures for 
evaluations were substantially complied with and that the 
evaluations warrant dismissal of the employee.  
E. The Office of Labor Relations shall forward its analysis to the 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 9 of 10 
 
superintendent of schools with copies to the principal leader 
or other senior administrator. 
F. The superintendent shall review the materials, make a 
decision, and give notice to the employee in accordance 
with G.L. c.71, Section 42. 
PROCEDURES FOR DISCIPLINE 
If a principal, head of school, or supervisor determines that an 
administrator has violated work rules, the supervisor should 
follow procedures outlined in Superintendent's Circular HRS-
PP10 Employee Discipline Procedures.  Additionally, the principal, 
head of school, or supervisor may consider the infraction in 
evaluating the administrator's overall performance. 
Failure to address job performance problems of assigned staff 
through the performance evaluation process represents 
unacceptable performance on the part of a supervisor. This 
problem is further compounded when "problem staff" are given a 
satisfactory rating by the supervisor and encouraged to transfer 
to another school/department.  Such failure on the part of a 
supervisor represents "unsatisfactory" administrative 
performance on the part of that person and they will be held 
accountable by the appropriate senior administrator and 
superintendent. 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM02  
Page 10 of 10 
 
Please refer in advance to Superintendent's Circular HRS-PP10 
Employee Discipline Procedures. 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
June 15 
Deadline for evaluators to submit 
evaluation to Instructional BASAS 
Administrators via VectorEvals 
platform.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Evaluation and Performance 
Management 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Boston, MA 
02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9627 
Email: 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org  
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
HRS-HS07 
Version 01 
 
 
STAFFING, REASSIGNMENT AND HIRING OF 
PERMANENT AND PROVISIONAL TEACHERS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
This circular outlines important dates and procedures regarding 
the staffing of schools for the 2023-2024 school year. Reflected in 
this circular are policies from the BPS-BTU Collective Bargaining 
Agreement, as well as information regarding the accelerated 
hiring timeline and hiring autonomy framework designed to 
enable all BPS schools to attract and hire the most diverse, 
qualified, and effective teachers as early as possible.  
Boston Public Schools and our school leaders are committed to 
building excellent schools that prepare our students to compete 
and succeed in the 21st century.  To cultivate world-class, global 
citizens, we commit to recruiting, retaining, and promoting a 
diverse, highly qualified, and effective workforce. 
As an urban district with an increasingly diverse student body, it 
is also imperative that schools fully comply with the Final 
Judgment of the Federal Court dated July 1994 that requires 
district and examination schools to employ a minimum of 25% 
Black teachers and staff and 10% other minority teachers.  
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 2 of 27 
 
 
In addition, one of our continuous hiring goals is to increase our 
number of bilingual teachers and staff to support our English 
Language Learner populations. We urge school leaders to take 
every possible step to help each school, and the district as a 
whole, to meet these mandates and goals.   
CONTENTS: links below jump to the section named. 
I. Determination of School Staffing Needs 
II. Posting of Teaching Positions 
III. Excessing 
IV. Staffing of Provisional Teachers 
V. Leaves of Absence 
VI. Hiring of International Teachers  
 
 
Attachments:  
ATTACHMENT 1: Application for Voluntary Excessing for Teachers 
and Paraprofessionals 
 
ATTACHMENT 2: Application for Additional Program Areas (APA)  
ATTACHMENT 3: Application Process for Job Sharing 
 
ATTACHMENT 4: SY 2023-24 Staffing Calendar 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 3 of 27 
 
 
I. DETERMINATION OF SCHOOL STAFFING NEEDS 
Timeframe: November to February 
Every fall, schools develop budget and staffing plans for the 
following year based on each school’s projected enrollment. 
Once a school’s estimated budget is established, the process 
known as Probable Organization (“Probable Org”) begins, in 
which schools, together with representatives from the Office of 
Human Resources, identify their staffing plans for the upcoming 
school year.  
Several components make up the Probable Organization process: 
ANNUAL BUDGET COLLABORATIVE AND PROBABLE 
ORGANIZATION PROCESS 
Central Office Responsibility 
School Leader 
Action Step 
Timeframe 
Finance Office sends schools 
their enrollment projections for 
the following year  
Review projections 
and report back to 
Finance and school  
superintendent if 
discrepancies exist 
Mid-to-late 
November 
Finance Office calculates each 
school’s budget based on 
Weighted Student Funding 
(WSF), in which specific student 
characteristics (e.g., special 
needs, early childhood, etc.) are 
assigned weights that 
determine school funding above 
Review budget and 
complete 
FutureForce Version 
1, in consultation 
with Budget, OHC, 
OEL, and Special 
Education, as 
needed 
December 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 4 of 27 
 
 
Central Office Responsibility 
School Leader 
Action Step 
Timeframe 
the school’s foundation amount 
plus base per-pupil amounts.   
Budget Collaboratives: 
representatives of Budget, OHC, 
OEL, Special Education, 
Planning & Analysis, school 
superintendents and school 
leaders meet to map the school 
structure for the following 
school year in FutureForce 
Version 2, including discussion 
of position reductions and 
additions to ensure 
programmatic, enrollment, or 
budget changes meet projected 
student needs 
Ensure all formative 
assessments are 
entered into 
TeachPoint for all 
educators on plans 
of one-year or less 
by January 15. This is 
a contractual 
deadline for all 
schools. 
Early-mid 
January  
• Office of Human Resources 
prepares staffing-related 
data reports for schools, 
including relevant personnel 
information including: 
• Leaves of absence for SY 
2023-24 and SY 2024-25 
• Licensure and Sheltered 
English Immersion (SEI) 
endorsement 
Review staffing-
related data and 
begin planning for 
implications of 
personnel changes. 
Determine which 
provisional teachers 
(if any) can/will 
receive letters of 
reasonable 
assurance. 
Mid-January 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 5 of 27 
 
 
Central Office Responsibility 
School Leader 
Action Step 
Timeframe 
• Additional program area 
requests 
• Voluntary requests for 
reassignment  
• Reasonable 
assurance/permanency 
decisions for provisional 
teachers  
 
Probable Organization: OHC, 
Budget, OEL, Special Education, 
school superintendents and 
school leaders meet to map the 
staffing for the following school 
year in FutureForce Version 3. 
Provide BTU 
representative with 
list of provisional 
teachers 
recommended to 
receive Reasonable 
Assurance 
Late 
January-
early 
February 
Posting Positions: School 
leaders, OHC, and Budget 
representatives confirm 
vacancies and newly created 
positions, then post positions for 
the upcoming staffing cycle.  
Submit job 
descriptions for 
vacant and newly 
created positions to 
OHC 
Late 
February 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 6 of 27 
 
 
II. POSTING OF TEACHING POSITIONS 
The staffing process for the 2023-2024 school year includes a 
hiring timeline designed to facilitate attracting and hiring the 
most diverse, qualified, and effective teachers as early as possible.   
Personnel Subcommittee 
Schools must ensure that the Personnel Subcommittee of the 
School Site Council is formed and ready to begin the hiring 
process by March 1. Schools must submit a complete roster of 
Personnel Subcommittee members to the Office of Family and 
Student Engagement by the end of October. Training related to 
personnel subcommittees are offered by the Office of Family and 
Student Engagement, the BTU, and the Office of Human 
Resources. Details about the personnel subcommittee can be 
found in Superintendent’s Circular FAM-04. 
Process  
Hiring early will ensure that schools are able to secure the most 
qualified candidates. Positions will be posted on TalentEd in early 
March once Probable Org and determination of vacancies have 
been concluded. Teachers who wish to apply for a position 
effective the first day of school for the upcoming school year 
must apply for postings online through TalentEd. Current BPS 
teachers may apply for any position for which they are qualified. 
Applicants who wish to be considered for inclusion in the district 
priority pool must submit their applications for the priority pool 
through TalentEd by March 1, 2024. Candidates for the priority 
pool will undergo a competency-based phone and resume 
screening process coordinated by the Office of Recruitment, 
Cultivation, and Diversity. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 7 of 27 
 
 
All approved hires will become effective on the first day of work 
for the upcoming school year. Any teacher who accepts a new 
position is not eligible to apply for any additional teaching jobs 
for the 2024-2025 school year. Beginning July 1, 2023, OHC will no 
longer approve lateral hires to prevent unanticipated vacancies 
late in the hiring season.  
Hiring Approval  
The Boston Public Schools is committed to recruiting, retaining, 
and promoting a highly qualified, culturally, and linguistically 
diverse workforce that reflects the rich diversity of our students 
and positively impacts both academic and non-academic student 
learning outcomes. The Office of Equity, Office of Human 
Resources, and school superintendents will establish an 
accountability process to ensure that reasonable efforts have 
been made to hire teachers that move schools and the district 
toward meeting our workforce diversity goals. 
Candidates hired must be qualified and meet diversity hiring 
requirements: 
• Teachers hired must hold valid licensure for the position. 
• Teachers hired must move the school toward meeting or 
maintaining district diversity goals. 
• School hiring teams must complete reference checks. 
Heads of school or principals and School Site Council Personnel 
Subcommittees should also be sure to interview qualified 
excessed permanent teachers. 
Qualifications for Additional Program Areas 
Deadline: January 1, 2024 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 8 of 27 
 
 
Permanent teachers may apply for additional program area(s) to 
identify a non-primary subject area(s) in which they are licensed. 
Permanent teachers who wish to apply for additional program 
areas must submit their request via this online form to the online 
Application for Additional Program Areas. Supplemental 
materials must be submitted to the Office of Human Resources 
by mail or in person. Applications and complete documentation 
must be submitted to the Office of Human Resources by January 
15, 2024. 
For additional information about applying for additional program 
areas, please refer to Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07.1, 
Qualifications for Additional Program Areas. 
Job Sharing for Permanent Teachers and Paraprofessionals 
1) Eligibility: All teachers requesting participation in job-
sharing must hold the appropriate license for the position. 
2) Process:  Permanent teachers or paraprofessionals who wish 
to indicate their interest in job sharing should submit an 
application via the Application for Job Sharing form by 
Monday, March 25, 2024. Each candidate must submit their 
own application. This submission of the application is an 
indication of interest only and is not binding.  
Participation in job-sharing requires approval by the 
principal/head of school. The principal/head of school should 
submit their approval via the Job Sharing Principal Approval form 
by Monday, March 25, 2024. 
For additional information about job sharing please refer to 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS02, Job Sharing for Permanent 
Teachers and Paraprofessionals for School Year 2023-2024. The 
Boston Teachers Union also holds an informational meeting 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 9 of 27 
 
 
every spring. Information on the specific date and time will be 
shared in the BTU bulletin. 
III. EXCESSING 
Voluntary and Involuntary Reassignment/Excess 
A. Voluntary Excessing – Teachers and Paraprofessionals 
Deadline:  February 1, 2024 
All permanent teachers or paraprofessionals who meet the 
Voluntary Excessing eligibility criteria as outlined in the 
Collective Bargaining Agreement (1) including those on 
leave of absence, may voluntarily request excessing 
regardless of whether there is a reduction in the number of 
positions. Teachers and paraprofessionals who voluntarily 
excess themselves forfeit their rights to the position they 
have left.  
Voluntary Excessing Requirements for Teachers:  
● The teacher must hold permanent status.  
● The request must be submitted to OHC by February 1, 2024 
(see instructions below). 
● The teacher must possess an overall rating of Proficient or 
higher on their most recent evaluation, which includes the 
Formative Assessment. 
 
(1) Refer to the Collective Bargaining Agreement (September 1, 
2018 – August 31, 2021) pp. 76-77 for a list of requirements for 
teachers and pp. 136 for paraprofessionals. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 10 of 27 
 
 
● The teacher may not have voluntarily excessed themselves 
within the prior two years. 
 
Teachers and paraprofessionals who wish to request 
excessing should submit their Application for Reassignment 
or complete ATTACHMENT 1, Application for Reassignment, 
and submit it to their head of school or principal as well as 
the Office of Human Resources by February 1, 2024.  The 
Office of Human Resources will review all applications and 
inform teachers or paraprofessionals and the school of the 
results of the request. Teachers and paraprofessionals who 
do not meet the above criteria will not be approved for 
voluntary excessing. Requests for voluntary excessing can 
be rescinded up until February 9, 2024. Approved requests 
are considered binding after that date. 
B. Involuntary Reassignment/Excessing 
Deadline: All involuntarily excessed teachers and nurses will 
be notified on or before April 15, 2024.  
To stay in a current position, permanent educators must 
hold the appropriate license(s) for the role to which they are 
assigned; otherwise, the educator will be excessed. 
 
Additionally, it may be necessary to excess permanent 
teachers if there is a reduction in the number of teaching 
positions for the following school year, a school is identified 
for closure, or the Massachusetts Department of Education 
designates it as Level 4 school. When a reduction in the 
number of positions occurs, involuntary excessing will be 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 11 of 27 
 
 
first by volunteers in a program area, then by reverse 
seniority within a program area unless: 
a. A teacher with more seniority voluntarily requests to be 
excessed; or, 
b. The excessing of the least junior teacher would prohibit 
compliance with U.S. District Court Order dated July 
1994. 
Schools with specific types of staffing autonomy may also 
involuntarily excess teachers. The school’s ability to 
involuntarily excess teachers must be included in the 
school’s governing document.  
Placement in Positions of Suitable Professional Capacity 
Permanent teachers who are not hired into vacant positions 
will be assigned in a suitable professional capacity in 
accordance with the BPS/BTU contract.  
IV. STAFFING FOR PROVISIONAL TEACHERS 
A. Reasonable Assurance for Provisional Teachers 
First and second-year provisional teachers may be eligible to 
receive reasonable assurance that they will continue in their 
current position for the following school year. Provisional 
teachers must hold a valid DESE license(s) for the position in 
which they are teaching in order for a Letter of Reasonable 
Assurance to be granted. No exceptions will be made.  
In addition to budgetary and licensure concerns, a teacher’s 
performance, as measured through the Massachusetts 
Regulations on Evaluation of Educators (603 CMR 35.00), is a 
major factor in determining whether a provisional teacher 
receives a Letter of Reasonable Assurance. Principals and 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 12 of 27 
 
 
heads of school will be held accountable for ensuring that all 
provisional teachers receive a Formative Assessment, which 
includes an overall rating, by February 1, 2024. Provisional 
teachers who have not been evaluated will not be eligible to 
receive a Letter of Reasonable Assurance. 
During Probable Organization, school leaders will work with 
OHC to identify all provisional teachers who are eligible to 
receive reasonable assurance, listing them in their Probable 
Organization template. OHC will send letters of Reasonable 
Assurance by April 15 to provisional teachers. 
Requests for permanent appointment for current 
Provisional 1 and Provisional 2 teachers will not be granted. 
See section IV.A below for information regarding Provisional 
3 teachers and the awarding of permanent status. 
B. Permanent Appointment of Provisional Teachers 
Eligibility 
The Massachusetts Regulations on Evaluation of Educators 
stipulate that achievement of Professional Teaching Status 
(being made a permanent teacher in BPS) is dependent 
upon receiving a rating of Proficient or above on all four of 
the Standards of Effective Teaching Practice, as well as an 
overall rating of Proficient or Exemplary. See below for 
additional criteria required for permanent status.  


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 13 of 27 
 
 
A school leader may recommend an educator (2) for 
permanent appointment (3) if they meet all the following 
criteria:   
● The teacher is provisional, and in their third year at BPS. 
● The teacher received a rating of Proficient or Exemplary 
overall and on all four Standards of Effective Teaching on 
a Formative Assessment, released by February 1, 2024. 
● The teacher will remain in the same position in their 
current school for the 2023-24 school year.  
● The teacher holds a valid DESE license(s) for the content 
area in which they are teaching. 
● The teacher holds either an ESL license or SEI 
Endorsement (Core content teachers of ELLs as required 
by DESE) or a Bilingual Educator Endorsement (BEE), 
should the BEE be requirement by their position. 
Please note: While the head of school or principal may 
recommend a Provisional 3 teacher for permanent status 
based upon fulfillment of the criteria above, the teacher may 
not be granted permanent status until a Summative 
 
(2) Educators considered teachers and eligible for Professional 
Teacher Status as defined by M.G.L. c.71 § 41 include teachers, 
school librarians, school adjustment counselors, school nurses, 
school social workers, or school psychologists.  
(3) A school leader may make the recommendation for 
permanent appointment when the educator is still in their third 
year to take effect on the first day of their fourth year. 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 14 of 27 
 
 
Evaluation is released which indicates Proficient or 
Exemplary practice overall in all four standards.  
If a Provisional 3 teacher does not achieve a rating of 
Proficient or Exemplary overall on all four standards on their 
Formative Assessment, they may be required to take a one-
year break in service. During the break in service, the 
teacher would not be eligible for employment as a teacher 
or substitute within Boston Public Schools. After the year-
long break in service, the teacher would once again be 
eligible for vacant teaching positions, and, if hired, would 
return to Provisional 1 status.  
Process 
To recommend a Provisional 3 teacher for Permanent 
Appointment during Probable Organization, the head of 
school or principal must take the following steps:  
1) Release the teacher’s Formative Assessment by January 
12, 2024 
2) Identify the position that the teacher will hold for the 
2023-24 school year 
3) Record the recommendation for Permanent 
Appointment on the Provisional Review Process page in 
FutureForce Version 2  
 
If, upon the principal or head of school’s release of the end-
of-year Summative Evaluation, the provisional teacher has 
successfully demonstrated effective teaching practice(s) by 
achieving a rating of Proficient or Exemplary overall and on 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 15 of 27 
 
 
all four standards of effective teaching, they will become 
permanent as of September 2023. 
V. LEAVES OF ABSENCE 
A. Planning to Take a Leave of Absence in 2024-2025 
Deadline: January 15, 2024 
Permanent teachers who are not currently on leave but 
are planning to take a Leave of Absence during the 2024-
2025 school year (e.g., personal reasons, education), must 
submit a leave application by January 15, 2024. 
Employees must submit a request for leave electronically 
via Employee Self-Service. Employees should submit 
applications even if they have not officially been accepted 
for a job and educational program but are in the 
application process. If a teacher is not accepted into a 
graduate program or job, the leave request can be 
rescinded, so long as the Office of Human Resources is 
notified by April 1. 
For further information regarding leaves of absences, 
including how to apply, please refer to Superintendent’s 
Circular HRS-HS-PP13.   
 
 
 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 16 of 27 
 
 
B. Currently on a Leave of Absence  
Deadline: January 15, 2024 
In November 2023, teachers currently on non-medical leave 
will be sent a letter informing them about the expiration of 
their leave. The teacher must submit the response form that 
accompanies the letter to the Office of Human Resources, 
stating their request to extend their leave/intent to remain 
on their leave or return from leave by January 15, 2024. If the 
teacher does not respond by the deadline, they will forfeit 
rights to their position.  
The leave letters are sent to the address listed on the Hub. 
Employees are responsible for ensuring that this address is 
correct. For further information regarding leaves of 
absences, please refer to Superintendent’s Circular HRS-
PP13, Absence and Leave Policy.   
VI. HIRING OF INTERNATIONAL TEACHERS 
International teachers are not legally permitted to work or 
to be paid without proof of official United States Citizenship 
& Immigration Services (USCIS) work authorization. Heads of 
school, principals, or RC managers should make it a 
common practice to inquire about the work authorization 
status of all their potential new hires.  
 
 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 17 of 27 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief Human Resources Officer 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Ave. Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Email: 
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 18 of 27 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
APPLICATION FOR REASSIGNMENT FOR TEACHERS AND 
PARAPROFESSIONALS 
 
SCHOOL:  ________________________________________________________  
Last Name__________________ First Name_______________Initial _____  
Maiden Name [if any} _____________________________________________             
Employee I.D. # __________________________________________________    
SELECT ONE:     Permanent Teacher             Paraprofessional 
 
THIS SECTION TO BE COMPLETED BY PERMANENT TEACHERS 
ONLY: 
I am requesting reassignment for the coming 2023-2024 
academic year, because (please check one) 
 I am a permanent teacher. 
 I am a permanent school nurse.  
 I am a permanent student support services coordinator 
(COSESS).  
 I am a paraprofessional. 
 There is a reduction in my program area. My program area 
is_________________________and my seniority date is  __________ . 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 19 of 27 
 
 
I understand that with this declaration this decision cannot be 
rescinded after February 14, 2024, and that I will be reassigned in 
the coming school year in accordance with the provisions of the 
Boston Teachers Union Contract.   
 
______________________________________________    ___________________  
  
 Signature 
Date 
PLEASE RETURN THIS FORM TO YOUR HEAD OF SCHOOL OR 
PRINCIPAL AND OFFICE OF HUMAN RESOURCES.  
HEADS OF SCHOOL, PRINCIPALS, AND OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE 
HEADS MUST FORWARD THIS APPLICATION TO THE OFFICE OF 
HUMAN RESOURCES NO LATER THAN FEBRUARY 1, 2024. 
Please mail, fax, or email this form to: 
Name: 
School and Central Based Staffing 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources  
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington St., Roxbury MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Fax: 
 617-635-9326 
Email: 
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
For additional questions, please submit an HR Inquiry Ticket via 
the Beacon. This can be found on Access Boston. 
An electronic version of this form can be found at: 
http://www.bostonpublicschools.org/Page/1019 
 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 20 of 27 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2: 
APPLICATION FOR ADDITIONAL PROGRAM AREAS (APA) 
2023-2024 ONLINE FORMS 
 
The Office of Human Resources has transitioned to using online 
forms.  The Application for Additional Program Areas can now be 
found at the link below.  Please note that employees will be 
required to sign in with their Boston Public Schools Gmail 
account. Supplemental materials such as transcripts can be 
submitted via mail or in person to the Office of Human 
Resources.  
Link to Apply: 
• Click Here for Additional Program Area Application 
• Or copy this URL: http://goo.gl/forms/JqftW4IOx1  
Supplemental Documentation 
Application approval is contingent on submission of one of the 
following documents:  
• Official transcript(s) indicating the completion of fifteen (15) 
graduate or undergraduate course credits relevant to the 
program area qualification 
OR 
● A signed letter from the head of school or principal, 
confirming the following information: 
o The subject area you taught (relevant to your 
application) 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 21 of 27 
 
 
o The specific years (at least 2) during which you taught 
the subject (must be within the last 10 years) 
o Confirmation that you taught at least 50% of the 
weekly schedule in that area. 
Please fill out the application form and submit supplemental 
documents to the contact listed below by January 12, 2024. 
 
For more information about this circular, please contact: 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9240 
Email: 
fcanty@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 22 of 27 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 3: 
APPLICATION FOR JOB SHARING 
To Indicate Interest in Job Sharing 
Permanent teachers or paraprofessionals who wish to 
indicate their interest in job sharing should submit a request 
using the online form shown below. The submission of an 
application only serves an indication of interest and is not 
binding. The job sharing application and principal/head of 
school approval forms must be submitted via the online 
form no later than 5:00 p.m. Monday March 25, 2024. 
Online Forms 
The Office of Human Resources now accepts job sharing 
applications online. Candidate applications for job share as 
well as principal/head of school approval can be submitted 
through the links below. Please note that employees will be 
required to sign in with their Boston Public Schools Gmail 
account. These links will also be made available through 
BTU and Paraprofessional representatives, the Boston 
Public Schools website, and the Superintendent’s Bulletin.  
Click Here for Job Sharing Request—Applicant Form 
Each applicant interested in job sharing must submit their 
own form. Principals must submit the form below for 
approval. 
Click Here for Job Sharing Request—Principal Approval Form 
Principals/heads of school must submit this form to approve 
a job share request.   


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 23 of 27 
 
 
For more information about job sharing, please see 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS02, or contact: 
Owner: 
Director of School-Based Staffing 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources  
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury MA, 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9240 
Email: 
ohr@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 4:  
STAFFING CALENDAR 
 


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 24 of 27 
 
 
December 2023 
December 18 Deadline for teachers to submit Leave of Absence 
intent letters to OHC 
January 2024 
January 10 – February 4 Budget Collaborative and Probable 
Organization meetings 
January 15 
Deadline for: 
Permanent teachers to request Personal Reasons, 
or Educational Leaves, to commence at the 
beginning of the next teacher work year 
Permanent teachers on approved year-long leaves 
to return November letter indicating intent to 
return at the start of next teacher work year or 
request an extension 
 
Teachers to submit Alternate Program Area 
requests to OHC 
January 17 
Deadline for teachers to submit application for 
Early Notification Incentive of Termination to 
receive $1,500 
Deadline for submission of Formative Assessments 
for all educators on 1-year plans  
 
February 2024 
February 1 (contractual deadlines)  
Deadline for teachers or paraprofessionals to 
submit reassignment requests (Voluntary Excess) 


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 25 of 27 
 
 
 
Deadline to notify permanent teachers of excess in 
Level 4, Innovation and Pilot Schools (Involuntary 
Excess)  
 
Deadline to notify paraprofessionals of excess in 
Level 5 Schools (Involuntary Excess) 
February 11 
Deadline for teachers or paraprofessionals to 
rescind reassignment requests (Voluntary Excess) 
March 2024 
Beginning  
March 1 
Teacher positions posted 
March 18 
OHC sends excess and layoff notices to 
paraprofessionals (tentative) 
March 25 
Deadline for job share applications 
April 2024 
April 1 - April 15    Paraprofessional transfer process (tentative)  
April 15 
(contractual deadline) 
Deadline to OHC to 
notify all Permanent teachers of excess 
 
deadline to notify Provisional teachers of 
reasonable assurance  
April 27 
Excess notification to Guild members (tentative)  
May 2024 
May 6  
Deadline for recommended paraprofessional 
transfer applicant decisions to TalentEd (tentative)  
May 9 
OHC sends assignment letters for paraprofessional 
transfers (tentative) 


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 26 of 27 
 
 
 
Paraprofessional Excess Pool participant and 
position lists available  
May 15 
(contractual deadline) All evaluations due for 
licensed educators on 1-year plans 
 
Guild Layoff notices issued 
May 19 
Paraprofessional excess pool (tentative)   
June 2024 
June 1 
(contractual deadline)  Deadline for OHC to notify 
Permanent teachers, BASAS, and managerial of 
layoff  
June 3 
Deadline for principals to submit paraprofessional 
excess pool rankings to OHC 
June 6  
OHC finalizes paraprofessional excess pool 
assignments (tentative) 
June 13 
Guild Excess Pool  (tentative)   
June 15 
(contractual deadline)  Deadline for OHC to notify 
Provisional teachers of non-renewal  
July 2024 
July 1 
Deadline for the approval of internal lateral 
transfers (hires). 
August 2024 
August 15 
OHC sends initial Suitable Professional Capacity 
assignment letters to Permanent teachers without 
positions (tentative)  
 


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07 
Page 27 of 27 
 
 
Please Note: Dates not subject to contractual requirements may 
change.  


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PM08 
Version 01 
 
2024BUS MONITOR PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
According to the collective bargaining agreement between the 
Boston School Committee and the United Steelworkers of 
America, Local 2936, a principal or head of school (or designee) is 
responsible for completing a performance evaluation for each 
transportation monitor assigned to the school. This includes both 
SPED cab monitors and transportation attendants hired by the 
school to ride the regular buses. The purpose of this evaluation is 
to assess the performance of monitors assigned to schools. 
SPED CAB MONITORS 
A performance evaluation form will be sent to principals/heads of 
school (or designee) along with a list of monitors who are 
assigned to their school.  Principals must submit a form for each 
of their assigned monitors via email to 
bpsdot@bostonpublicschools.org by May 23, 2025 for all assigned 
(not standby) bus monitors that monitor their students. Using the 
evaluation form, the principal/head of school or designee will 
assess the monitor’s performance. To assist school leaders in 
completing this form, information about the monitors' duties and 
responsibilities is included in this circular. 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM08 
Page 2 of 8 
 
If you have any questions regarding the evaluation form or 
process, please contact the assistant director of the Monitors 
Unit, Transportation Department at 617-230-3561. 
TRANSPORTATION ATTENDANTS 
The principal/head of school of any school with a transportation 
attendant assigned to a regular bus must complete (or designate 
someone to complete) an evaluation form and send it as a PDF 
attachment via email to bpsdot@bostonpublicschools.org and 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org by May 23. 
 
If you have any questions regarding the evaluation form or 
process, please contact the Director of Evaluation and 
Performance Management, at 617-635-9627. 
DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION BUS 
MONITORS 
Special Education bus monitors have been assigned to monitor 
and assist students with special needs while they are being 
transported to and from school. Their primary responsibilities 
include: 
● Boarding the vehicle before or at the same time as the first 
monitor-required student on the route and remaining on the 
vehicle at all times until every monitor-required student has 
reached their stop 
● Attending to the special needs of monitor-required students, 
although monitors are also responsible for the general 
supervision of all students on the vehicle 
● Riding with the students in the back of the vehicle and not in 
the front seat unless only the front seat is available 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM08 
Page 3 of 8 
 
● Assisting students in and out of the vehicle if necessary. This 
includes setting up and collapsing wheelchairs or other 
equipment when necessary 
● Exhibiting proper behavior at all times 
● Ensuring that all students wear seat belts 
● Ensuring that students not leave the vehicle anywhere other 
than their assigned stops.  If a student leaves the vehicle 
without authorization, the driver must be instructed to contact 
the dispatcher immediately 
● Prohibiting the consumption of food or beverages, smoking, or 
bringing radios on the vehicle 
● Notifying the school to which the monitor is assigned and the 
operations coordinator at the yard if the monitor will be absent 
from work.  Notification must take place by 4:30 am for the 
morning or at least two hours prior to the scheduled reporting 
time for the afternoon 
● Performing other related duties as directed by the supervisors. 
 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
May 23 
Deadline for principals/heads of school to submit signed copies 
as PDF attachments via email to 
bpsdot@bostonpublicschools.org and 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org. 
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM08 
Page 4 of 8 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Assistant Director of the Monitors Unit 
Department: 
Transportation Department 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-230-3561 
Fax: 
617-635-7705 
Email: 
bpsdot@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
 
Name: 
Director of Evaluation and Performance Management 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
 
 
Email 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM08 
Page 5 of 8 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION FORM 
BUS MONITOR – SCHOOL YEAR 2024-2025 
 
NAME OF MONITOR _________________________DATE 
 
 
EMPLOYEE # ___________NAME OF SCHOOL 
 
A.M.______    P.M._______              BUS NUMBER 
 
 
Please review the position overview and complete the form. The 
following scale will be used for ranking performance. 
U UNSATISFACTORY:  The employee has failed to meet 
expectations and their performance of the position's duties and 
responsibilities needs improvement. 
N NEEDS IMPROVEMENT:  The employee’s performance of this 
position’s duties and responsibilities needs improvement. 
S MEETS EXPECTATIONS:  The employee's performance of the 
position's duties and responsibilities meets expectations. 
E EXCEEDS EXPECTATIONS:  The employee's performance of the 
position's duties and responsibilities exceeds expectations. 
 
Quality of Work: performs assigned tasks as per job  
description accurately and competently. 
U N S E 
Skills and Knowledge: demonstrates level of skill and 
knowledge required to do the job. 
U N S E 
Attendance and Punctuality: is punctual, gives notice  
of sick, personal, and other leave. 
U N S E 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM08 
Page 6 of 8 
 
Professional Demeanor: maintains professional  
demeanor, is tactful, cooperative, and courteous to  
people at all levels of the School Department and  
the public.       
U N S  E                    
 
Recommendations/Comments:  
 
 
_____________________________________________   
 
 
Evaluator’s Signature  
Date 
_____________________________________________   
 
 
Principal/Head of School 
Date 
Please submit signed, scanned copies via email to: 
bpsdot@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM08 
Page 7 of 8 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION FORM 
TRANSPORTATION ATTENDANT – SUMMER 2025 
 
NAME OF TRANSPORTATION  
ATTENDANT: _______________________________ DATE 
 
EMPLOYEE # ____________NAME OF SCHOOL 
  
 
 
The following scale will be used for ranking performance. 
U UNSATISFACTORY:  The employee has failed to meet 
expectations and their performance of the position's duties and 
responsibilities needs improvement. 
N NEEDS IMPROVEMENT:  The employee’s performance of this 
position’s duties and responsibilities needs improvement. 
S MEETS EXPECTATIONS:  The employee's performance of the 
position's duties and responsibilities meets expectations. 
E EXCEEDS EXPECTATIONS:  The employee's performance of the 
position's duties and responsibilities exceeds expectations. 
Quality of Work: performs assigned tasks as per job  
description accurately and competently. 
U N S E 
Skills and Knowledge: demonstrates level of skill and  
knowledge required to do the job. 
U N S E 
Attendance and Punctuality: is punctual, gives notice  
of sick, personal, and other leave. 
U N S E 
Professional Demeanor: maintains professional  
demeanor, is tactful, cooperative, and courteous to  


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM08 
Page 8 of 8 
 
people at all levels of the School Department and  
the public.  
U N S E 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Comments:  
 
 
_____________________________________________   
 
 
Evaluator’s Signature  
Date 
_____________________________________________   
 
 
Principal/Head of School 
Date 
Please submit signed, scanned copies via email to: 
bpsdot@bostonpublicschools.org 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER:  
HRS-PM01 
Version 01 
 
 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF TEACHERS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
Comprehensive information pertaining to the performance 
evaluation of BTU under the 2011 education regulation 
amendments (603 CMR 35.00) is now located at the Office of 
Human ResourcesEvaluations webpage. 
A summary of BTU dates and deadlines can be found on Page 
73 of the BTU-BPS Collective Bargaining Agreement. 
Long-Term Substitute Teachers are considered Teachers for 
the purposes of performance evaluation if they have been in 
position continuously for more than fifteen (15) consecutive 
days. 
General inquiries regarding performance evaluation of DESE-
licensed educators may be directed to: 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org 
Information regarding performance-related dismissal of 
teachers may be found in Superintendent’s Circular #HRS-
PP19. 
 
 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM01 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Evaluation and Performance 
Management 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Boston, 
MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9627 
E-mail: 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
HRS-PP12 
Version 01 
 
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE LEAVE POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Boston Public Schools is committed to the health and safety of 
our employees and their families. This circular is intended to 
comply with applicable state laws (1 ) that are designed to protect 
victims of domestic violence. Should you or your family member 
be a victim of domestic violence or abusive behavior, you are 
encouraged to communicate with the Office of Human resources 
about the situation.   
Boston Public Schools must provide employees with up to 15 
days of time off in a 12-month period, if: 
• the employee or their family member is the victim of 
abusive behavior (such as domestic violence, stalking, sexual 
assault, or kidnapping); and 
• the purpose of the leave is to seek medical attention, 
counseling, secure housing, or obtain legal or other victim 
services directly related to the abusive behavior against the 
employee or family member of the employee. 
 
(1) Section 52E of Chapter 149 of the Massachusetts General Laws 
(Section 10 of Chapter 260 of the Acts of 2014) 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP12 
Page 2 of 3 
 
For purposes of this policy, a family member includes: 
• Married spouses 
• Persons "in a substantive dating or engagement 
relationship" AND who reside together  
• Persons having a child in common regardless of whether 
they have ever married or resided together 
• A parent, step-parent, child, step-child, sibling, grandparent, 
or grandchild 
• Persons in a guardianship relationship 
You are immediately eligible for this leave upon the beginning of 
your employment. Employees may use accrued sick, personal, 
and vacation time to remain in paid status during a covered leave 
under this policy.  If no accrued time is available, leave under this 
policy will be unpaid. 
We request that you provide appropriate advance notice of this 
leave (as required by the current leave policy), unless there is an 
imminent danger to your immediate health and safety (in which 
case, we must receive notification within 3 workdays that the 
leave was taken or is being taken for reasons covered by this 
policy). If you take this leave, please provide documentation 
evidencing that you or your family member has been a victim of 
domestic violence or abusive behavior within 30 days of the leave 
request. Such forms of documentation may include: 
• A court issued protective order 
• An official document from a court, provider, or public 
agency 
• A police report or statement of a victim or witness provided 
to the police 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP12 
Page 3 of 3 
 
• Official legal documentation attesting to perpetrator’s guilt 
• Medical documentation of treatment for the abusive 
behavior 
• A sworn statement from the employee attesting to being a 
victim of abusive behavior 
• A sworn statement from a professional who has assisted the 
employee or the employee's family, e.g., a counselor, social 
worker, health care worker, or member of the clergy. 
Perpetrators of domestic violence are not entitled to leave under 
this statute. 
Provided you have submitted proper documentation, your 
employment is protected for leave taken under this policy. If you 
have questions at any time as to how this policy applies to you, 
please do not hesitate to contact the Office of Human resources. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Employee Services – Leave of Absence Team 
Department: 
Office of Human resources 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9255 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
ohrleaves@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-HS04 
Version 01 
 
SCHOOL LEADER SCREENING PROCESS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The process for recruiting, screening and hiring for school leader 
vacancies requires collaboration among many offices, including 
the Superintendent, Regional School Superintendents, the Office 
of Human Resources, the Office of Engagement, the Division of 
Schools, and the schools with vacant leadership positions.  
School leader vacancies may be filled either through this process, 
or through the appointment of an existing employee or an 
external candidate by the Superintendent. The latter would not 
require the position be posted in the manner described in this 
circular. 
 
POSITION POSTING 
A job posting for school leader positions will be available by 
November 1, 2024. The application can be found by searching 
'school leader'. The selection process will yield qualified 
candidates for the entire district and for autonomous schools.  
► Please note: Autonomous schools have the right to create 
and advertise their own job postings in order to recruit 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 2 of 10 
 
candidates who align with the specific vision and values of 
their communities.  See “AUTONOMOUS SCHOOLS”, page 8. 
 
MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS 
Minimum qualifications are as follows:  
● Master’s degree in education or related field. 
● Evidence of submission or successful completion of all MA-
PAL tasks (Massachusetts Performance Assessment for 
Leaders) or 
● Principal/Assistant Principal licensure or equivalent by time 
of appointment. 
PREFERRED QUALIFICATIONS 
Preferred qualifications are as follows: 
● Fluency in one or more non-English languages. 
● 5+ years of experience as a school leader in a large, urban 
school district. 
PRE-SCREENING AND SELECTION PROCESS 
The selection process consists of the following phases:  
● Phase I: Application and Resume Review (Nov 2024 - Feb 
2025). 
● Phase II: Performance Tasks (Nov 2024 - Feb 2025). 
● Phase III: School-Based Interview (Jan - April 2025). 
● Phase IV: Interview with Superintendent or Superintendent 
Designee (March - April 2025). 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
Candidates who successfully advance through the first two 
phases of the process will be eligible to interview with school-
based hiring teams The school-based hiring process is led by the 
Regional School Superintendent or their designee. The Regional 
School Superintendent or designee will convene the School 
Screening Committee and serve as the Chairperson. As 
Chairperson they shall decide which of the approved candidates 
shall interview with the Committee, based on the characteristics 
and needs of that school community. 
SCHOOL SCREENING COMMITTEE GUIDELINES 
The Regional School Superintendent or designee shall chair the 
School Screening Committee for all school leader positions, 
including those for autonomous schools. The Office of 
Engagement will provide support to the Chairperson of the 
School Screening Committee by coordinating the vote to 
determine who will serve on the School Screening Committee as 
well as by leading those committee members through a bias 
training. 
Members: 
The membership of the School Screening Committee shall 
include the following: 
● The Regional School Superintendent and/or 
superintendent’s designee, who serves as Chairperson. 
● Three teacher members of the Boston Teachers Union (BTU) 
representing the racial and ethnic diversity of the school’s 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 4 of 10 
 
student population, selected by BTU members on the 
School Site Council. 
● One member of the Boston Association of School 
Administrators and Supervisors (BASAS), as selected by the 
Chairperson, with special consideration for any BASAS 
members working at the school. 
● Three parents from the school, selected by parent members 
of the School Site Council, and representing the racial and 
ethnic diversity of the school’s student population. At least 
one must be an elected member of the School Site Council 
or School Parent Council. 
○ Among the three parent members selected, one must 
be a parent of a special education student or a student 
in a program for Multilingual Learners if a special 
education program or program for English Learners is 
in place at the school. Parent members of the School 
Site Council shall select this parent. 
● Optional: At the discretion of the School Screening 
Committee Chairperson, one representative from a partner 
organization that works closely with the school, such as a 
community, business or higher education partner. 
● Secondary only: One student from the School Site Council or 
a student from the Student Advisory Council. 
● School mergers only: In the event two schools are scheduled 
to merge and, as a result must complete a screening 
process for a new School Leader, the School Screening 
Committee shall be comprised of the same members as 
listed above, with the following adjustments: 
○ Two BTU members from each school from different 
racial groups, selected by BTU members on the School 
Site Council  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 5 of 10 
 
○ Two parents from each school, selected by parent 
members of the School Site Council, and representing 
the racial and ethnic diversity of the school’s student 
population. At least one must be an elected member of 
the School Site Council or School Parent Council. 
○ The Operational Leader for the region, who shall serve 
as the BASAS representative. 
All Committee members shall adhere to norms of respect, 
collaboration and confidentiality throughout the screening 
process. In the event any committee member fails to conduct 
themselves according to these norms, that member may be 
removed from the process, per the discretion of the Chairperson. 
Process: 
Upon creation of the School Screening Committee, the 
Chairperson shall give written notice to each committee member 
at least five working days prior to the first meeting. Screening 
Committee members shall also receive from the Chairperson a 
copy of each candidate’s application materials and a screening 
packet, which will include guidelines for interviewing and scoring 
candidates and a list of all committee members.  
School mergers only: In the event two schools are scheduled to 
merge, both sitting school leaders shall have the opportunity to 
be interviewed by the School Screening Committee. 
 
Upon convening, the Committee will: 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 6 of 10 
 
● Review the responsibilities and functions of the committee, 
including this Superintendent’s Circular. 
● Review the job description, including the qualifications 
needed for the position. 
● Review the School Leader Rubric & Scoring Guide for 
candidate interviews, which shall be based on candidates’ 
proficiency in the standards for school-level administrators 
as enumerated by DESE: 
○ Instructional Leadership 
○ Management and Operations 
○ Family & Community Engagement 
○ Professional Culture 
● Committees shall use the School Leader Rubric & Scoring 
Guide as the basis for their scoring. 
○ Per the Guide, School Screening Committee members 
shall score candidate responses in private. The 
Chairperson shall then aggregate scores and 
recommend the top three candidates based on these 
scores (See “Reports” below).  
● Establish an interview schedule. 
○ Set dates and times for candidate interviews and 
future meetings.  
Quorum for the meetings shall be a majority of the members and 
must include the Chairperson and at least one parent and one 
teacher. At least one member present must be a person of color. 
If any of these groups is not represented, the remaining 
committee members may, by unanimous vote, decide to proceed 
with meetings. Decisions of the Screening Committee must be 
made with a quorum present and shall be carried by a majority of 
the members present at the meetings. Voting shall be done by 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 7 of 10 
 
secret ballot unless the committee decides otherwise. All 
members of the Screening Committee are equal in status and 
have one vote. 
Representatives from the Office of Human Capital, the Office of 
Equity, the Office of Engagement or the Office of Leadership 
Development may attend meetings. 
TIMELINE 
In order to ensure the placement of strong candidates as early as 
possible, School Screening Committees shall make every attempt 
to move efficiently through the above-listed steps, while still 
maintaining the integrity of the process. Specifically, School 
Screening Committees shall aim to convene, establish an 
interview schedule and determine the three highest-scoring 
candidates within one month from the date a vacancy becomes 
public. Should the Committee not be on pace to accomplish this, 
the Chairperson reserves the right to waive the quorum 
requirements listed above in order to convene meetings and 
conduct interviews. 
INTERIM APPOINTMENTS 
Any schools which have Interim School Leaders shall convene the 
School Screening Committee in January and shall conclude their 
search by March 1, 2025.  
Any schools with vacancies which emerge following May 1, 2025 
may, at the discretion of the Regional School Superintendent, 
forgo the above-listed steps and the Superintendent shall instead 
appoint an Interim School Leader for the following year. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 8 of 10 
 
SCREENING COMMITTEE MEETING NOTES 
The Chairperson shall ensure that Screening Committee meeting 
notes are taken at each meeting and that the following 
information is accurately noted: 
● Name, race, and affiliation of each Screening Committee 
member. 
● Dates and times of meetings. 
● Attendance at each meeting. 
● All votes taken. 
All members may have copies of the meeting notes. After the 
screening process is complete, the members of the Screening 
Committee will return all resumes and meeting notes to the 
Office of Leadership Development. All information disclosed at all 
Screening Committee meetings is assumed confidential, both to 
ensure the integrity of the hiring process and to protect 
applicants whose employers may not be aware they are applying 
for a position.  
The Chairperson is responsible for working with the Department 
of Schools to improve and/or increase the pool of applicants. 
REPORTS 
Per the School Leader Rubric & Scoring Guide, the Chairperson of 
the Screening Committee will ensure that the scores from the 
Committee’s resume screening and interviews are accurately 
tracked and recorded. The Chairperson will tally the candidate 
scores from the Committee and will identify the top three 
recommended candidates based on these scores. The 
Chairperson will then complete a School Leader Nomination 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 9 of 10 
 
Form which lists these three candidates. The form will be 
submitted to the Chief of Schools, the Chief of Staff and the 
Executive Director of Leadership Development for next steps 
with the Superintendent, who will make the final determination.  
● At least one of these three candidates must be a person of 
color. 
● The Chairperson of the Committee may add additional 
candidate(s) to the nomination form, above and beyond the 
three required, per their discretion. 
FINAL INTERVIEWS AND DECISION 
● Upon receipt of the Screening Committee’s 
recommendations, the Superintendent and/or the Regional 
School Superintendent will interview recommended 
candidates.  
● The Regional School Superintendent and/or designee will 
check references and report back information to the 
Superintendent, who will determine the final appointments. 
The Superintendent retains the authority to appoint the 
school leader recommended by the School Screening 
Committee or may choose to appoint another candidate.  
● The Superintendent will notify the Screening Committee of 
the final decision of the selected candidate. 
● The Office of Human Resources will send offer letters to new 
hires. 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS04 
Page 10 of 10 
 
AUTONOMOUS SCHOOLS 
All elements of this circular shall apply to autonomous schools 
(Pilot, Horace Mann Charters, Innovation and In-District Charter 
Schools) in the same manner they apply to non-autonomous 
schools. The School Screening Committee Chairperson shall 
collaborate closely with the governing boards of autonomous 
schools to ensure an efficient and effective process that aligns 
with the vision of the school community. 
Uniquely, the governing boards of autonomous schools have the 
right to create and advertise their own job postings in order to 
recruit candidates who align with the specific vision and values of 
their communities. Such candidates must still be vetted and 
approved through Phase 1 & Phase 2 of the district-wide process 
outlined above (“Pre-Screening and Selection Process,” pg.1). 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Department: 
Division of Schools  
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 
Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Fax: 
617-635-7956 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PP09 
 
 
CRIMINAL HISTORY SCREENING 
This policy circular shall remain in effect unless rescinded or 
replaced by a subsequent version. 
The Boston School Committee and superintendent are 
committed to providing a safe learning and work environment 
for Boston Public Schools students and employees. Following all 
applicable federal and state laws and regulations regarding 
Criminal Offender Record Information (CORI), including 
fingerprinting and Sex Offender Registry Information (SORI), it is 
the policy of the Boston Public Schools to conduct a criminal 
background check (“CORI check”) at least once every three (3) 
years on current and prospective employees, contracted service 
providers, volunteers, school transportation providers, and other 
individuals who may have direct and unmonitored contact with 
children.1 The Boston Public Schools criminal history screening 
policy applies to all current and prospective:  
a. full-time or part-time employees and candidates for 
employment, including promotions 
b. substitute employees 
c. student teachers, apprentices, and interns 
 
1 See also the Boston Public Schools Sexual Offender Registry 
Information (SORI) Policy. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 2 of 32 
 
d. employees of educational programs 
e. individuals who regularly provide school-related 
transportation to children 
f. contractors 
g. volunteers, subcontractors, and laborers who perform work 
in school buildings or on school grounds 2 
The Department of Criminal Justice Information Services (DCJIS) 
provides Boston Public Schools with “Required 2” access to CORI. 
Required 2 access produces a CORI record that includes all 
adult/youthful offender convictions, non-convictions, and 
pending offenses but does not list any sealed, juvenile, civil, or 
non-incarcerable crimes. The following practices and procedures 
are applicable when CORI and other criminal history checks, 
including fingerprint screening, are part of a general background 
check for employment or volunteer work in BPS. 
CONDUCTING CRIMINAL HISTORY (CORI AND FINGERPRINTING) 
SCREENING 
Criminal history checks, including CORI checks and fingerprint 
screenings, will only be conducted as authorized by the 
Department of Criminal Justice Information Services (DCJIS) 
under Mass. Gen. Laws c. 6, §§ 172 and 172B ½, c. 71, § 38R, 28 CFR 
20.33(a)(3), and Public Law 92‐544. Boston Public Schools will only 
perform a criminal history check after receiving a completed 
 
2 Volunteers, subcontractors, and laborers will not be subject to 
fingerprinting. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 3 of 32 
 
CORI/Fingerprinting Acknowledgement Form and confirming 
the individual’s identity. 
NOTE: BPS policy and procedures for criminal history checks 
including fingerprint screening are also subject to the 
regulations, policies, and procedures promulgated by the DCJIS 
and state board of elementary and secondary education. In 
accordance with those procedures, all candidates’ fingerprints 
will be searched against the Automated Fingerprint 
Identification System (AFIS) fingerprint database which is 
maintained by the Massachusetts State Police and the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation’s (FBI) Integrated Automated Fingerprint 
Identification System (IAFIS) fingerprint database. A fee will be 
required to conduct a fingerprint screen. 
In the instance that the Boston Public Schools requests an 
additional CORI Check from the DCJIS on an individual whose 
CORI has already been obtained within a year of signing the 
original CORI/Fingerprinting Acknowledgement Form, the 
individual will receive notice within 72 hours that it intends to 
conduct an additional CORI check. A current employee being 
considered for promotion must submit to a CORI check, 
regardless of whether a CORI check has been conducted within 
that year. 
ACCESS TO CRIMINAL HISTORY INFORMATION (CORI AND 
FINGERPRINT SCREENING)  
All criminal history information obtained from the DCJIS is 
confidential, and access to the information must be limited to 
those individuals who have a “need to know.” This may include, 
but is not limited to, staff submitting the CORI requests and staff 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 4 of 32 
 
members of the CORI/Criminal History Review Panel. The Boston 
Public Schools maintains and keeps a current list of each 
individual authorized to have access to, or view, a CORI and the 
results of a fingerprint screen. This list must be updated every six 
(6) months and is subject to inspection at any time only upon 
request by the DCJIS. 
CORI TRAINING  
The Boston Public Schools is an agency required to maintain a 
CORI Policy under Mass. Gen. Laws c. 6, §171A. Accordingly, all 
personnel authorized to conduct criminal history background 
checks or inspect CORI information will review and familiarize 
themselves with the educational and relevant training materials 
regarding CORI laws and regulations made available by the 
DCJIS.  
USE OF CRIMINAL HISTORY IN BACKGROUND SCREENING  
The Boston Public Schools shall only access, for employment 
purposes, the CORI and fingerprinting information for candidates 
who are otherwise qualified for the position for which they have 
applied and for current employees during periodic criminal 
background checks. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, a criminal record will not 
automatically disqualify an individual for employment, contract 
work, subcontract work, volunteering, or interning. Suitability 
determinations based on criminal background checks will be 
consistent with this policy and applicable laws or regulations.  
I. 
Verifying a Subject’s Identity  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 5 of 32 
 
If a criminal record is received from the DCJIS, the information is 
to be closely compared with the information on the 
CORI/Fingerprinting Acknowledgement Form and any other 
identifying information provided by an individual to ensure the 
record belongs to the individual. 
If the information in the CORI record provided does not precisely 
match the identification information provided by the individual, a 
determination is to be made by a Boston Public Schools 
employee(s) authorized to make such determinations based on a 
comparison of the CORI record and documents provided by the 
individual.  
II. 
Inquiring About Criminal History  
In connection with any decision regarding employment, 
internships, or volunteer opportunities within the Boston Public 
Schools, the individual shall be provided with a copy of their 
criminal history record, whether obtained from the DCJIS or any 
other source, before asking the subject questions about their 
criminal history. The source(s) of the criminal history record is 
also to be disclosed to the subject.  
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 6 of 32 
 
III. 
Determining Suitability  
When an individual’s CORI record or fingerprint screen lists one 
or more offenses, the first step is to convene the CORI/Criminal 
History Review Panel. The panel will verify that the criminal 
record belongs to the individual and that the individual has not 
disputed the criminal record’s accuracy based on the procedure 
described in Section V of this policy.  
Findings from CORI Investigations – No Further Review – 
Outstanding Warrants 
1) If the CORI investigation reveals a conviction of a Table B 
crime that is a felony more than ten years old or a Table B 
crime that is a misdemeanor more than five years old, and 
there are no subsequent convictions or pending cases of 
any kind, the CORI/Criminal History Review Panel will not 
consider such crime. For purposes of computing the five- 
and ten-year periods, the period will run from the date any 
court supervision, probation, or sentence was terminated. 
2) If the CORI investigation reveals an outstanding warrant for 
any offense, the CORI/Criminal History Review Panel will 
inform the candidate that they are ineligible for 
employment unless the warrant is removed. 
3) Storage, retention, and destruction of all CORI reports, 
including those with a finding of “no record,” shall follow 
DCJIS regulations at 803 CMR 2.00: Criminal Offender 
Record Information (CORI).  
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 7 of 32 
 
Findings from CORI Investigation - Crimes Subject to Review 
1) If the CORI investigation reveals a conviction of a Table A 
crime, regardless of when it occurred, or a pending Table A 
crime, or a conviction of a Table B crime within the five- and 
ten-year periods or a pending Table B crime, the 
CORI/Criminal History Review Panel will carefully consider 
the following factors in its decision to hire or not hire the 
candidate: 
a. time since the conviction or pending offense 
b. age of the candidate at the time of the offense 
c. nature and specific circumstances of the offense 
d. the sentence imposed and the length of any period of 
incarceration 
e. relationship of the criminal act to the nature of the 
work to be performed 
f. number of offenses 
g. whether offenses were committed in association with a 
dependence on drugs or alcohol, from which the 
candidate has since recovered 
h. any relevant evidence of rehabilitation or lack thereof, 
such as information about compliance with conditions 
of parole or probation, including orders of no contact 
with victims and witnesses; and the individual’s 
conduct and experience since the time of the offense, 
including but not limited to educational or professional 
certifications obtained; and 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 8 of 32 
 
i. any other relevant information, including information 
submitted by the candidate or requested by the 
CORI/Criminal History Review Panel. 
2) The CORI/Criminal History Review Panel, using a form 
prescribed by BPS, will also make a written determination of 
its decision to hire or not hire such candidate. This form will 
document the factors and rationale for the decision of the 
CORI/Criminal History Review Panel. A copy of such written 
determination will be maintained by the CORI/Criminal 
History Review Panel in a secure location, together with the 
CORI and criminal record disclosure information that may 
have been requested under this policy. 
Completion of the written determination form will serve to 
confirm that the CORI/Criminal History Review Panel has 
carefully reviewed the CORI and other relevant information, 
including information provided by the candidate, so that the 
vulnerable populations served by BPS are protected, and 
candidates with criminal histories are given a fair 
opportunity to be employed and to reintegrate successfully 
into the workforce. 
3) If the CORI/Criminal History Review Panel decides to hire a 
candidate with a CORI showing a conviction of or pending 
Table A crime, the CORI/Criminal History Review Panel will 
submit the prescribed form to the Chief Human Resources 
Officer, the Superintendent of Schools, or their designees. 
The CORI/Criminal History Review Panel will not proceed to 
hire the candidate for ten business days from the date the 
Chief Human Resources Officer or the Superintendent of 
Schools, or their designees receive the form. During such 
time, the Chief Human Resources Officer, the 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 9 of 32 
 
Superintendent of Schools, or their designees may 
disapprove the hire or request additional information. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a CORI/Criminal History 
Review Panel may proceed to hire the candidate before the 
expiration of the five days if the Chief Human Resources 
Officer or the Superintendent of Schools or their designees, 
after receiving the prescribed form, informs the 
CORI/Criminal History Review Panel that they do not intend 
to disapprove the hire or request additional information. 
4) If the CORI/Criminal History Review Panel does not wish to 
hire a candidate with a Table A crime or a Table B crime 
within the five- and ten-year period, the prescribed form will 
be completed and maintained on file in a secure location. 
ADVERSE DECISIONS BASED ON CRIMINAL HISTORY 
INFORMATION (CORI AND FINGERPRINT SCREENING) 
If the Boston Public Schools is inclined to make an adverse 
decision based on criminal history background check results, the 
candidate will be notified immediately. The candidate shall be 
provided with a copy of the Boston Public Schools Criminal 
History Screening policy and their criminal history. The source(s) 
of the criminal history will also be revealed. The individual will 
then be provided with an opportunity to dispute the accuracy of 
the information. Individuals shall also be provided a copy of 
DCJIS’ Information Concerning the Process for Correcting a 
Criminal Record. The Boston Public Schools will stay the decision 
for a brief time and document the steps taken to comply with 
this procedure. 
SECONDARY DISSEMINATION LOGS  


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 10 of 32 
 
All CORIs obtained from the DCJIS are confidential and can only 
be disseminated as authorized under the applicable law and 
regulations. A central secondary dissemination log shall be used 
to record any dissemination of a CORI outside this organization, 
including dissemination at the individual’s request.  
CORI/CRIMINAL HISTORY REVIEW PANEL 
The Boston Public Schools CORI/Criminal History Review Panel 
shall consist of four or more of the following individuals: the 
Deputy Superintendent of Operations, the Chief Human 
Resources Officer, the Director of Transportation, the Director of 
Facilities, the Director of Labor Relations, the Director of Equity, 
or their designees. The panel, as well as the Superintendent, 
Legal Advisor, and Chief Operations Officer, shall all have access 
to criminal history information on a case-by-case basis as is 
necessary to perform their job functions. When reviewing an 
individual’s criminal history information to determine whether an 
individual is qualified for employment as a BPS employee or is 
qualified to work as a contractor, subcontractor, laborer, intern, or 
volunteer, the panel will review such factors as outlined in 
Section VII. The panel will determine whether an individual 
qualifies for employment or will commence work as a contractor, 
subcontractor, laborer, intern, or volunteer. The decision made by 
the CORI/Criminal History Review Panel shall be recorded and 
shall be made by a majority of members present. A minimum of 
four panel members must be present for a decision to be made. 
In the interests of confidentiality and the furtherance of the 
protection of school children, the identity of the panel reviewing 
a particular subject’s confidential criminal history will not be 
disclosed.  


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 11 of 32 
 
REGISTRATION PROCESS FOR FINGERPRINTING 
You must submit to fingerprinting as part of your criminal 
background screening to work for Boston Public Schools. Please 
follow the steps below to register for an appointment to get 
fingerprinted at the nearest site (most likely Dorchester) 
operated by MorphoTrust USA.  
The below summarizes the procedure to register and get your 
fingerprints taken. For further information and details, please see 
the state’s guide, “Statewide Applicant Fingerprint Identification 
Services (SAFIS) Program: Registration Guide,” available at the 
following link: https://www.mass.gov/files/2017-06/safis-
registration-guide-dcf-fv1-0_0.pdf  
Step 1:  Sign up for an appointment online or over the phone. 
 
https://ma.ibtfingerprint.com/ 
 
866-349-8130 
Step 2:  Give the Provider ID for Boston Public Schools.  
 
Enter the following number as the district Provider ID: 
00350000 
Step 3:  Pay a fee for the FBI and state government agencies 
to process your fingerprints. 
Licensed educators:  $55 
Non-licensed staffers:  $35  
Step 4:  Make an appointment and get a Registration 
Confirmation Number. You will need to bring the 
Registration Confirmation Number with you to your 
appointment. 
Step 5:  
Go to your appointment and bring a proper ID.  
 
Your ID must contain a photo, your full name, and 
date of birth and be unexpired.  


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 12 of 32 
 
Step 6:  
Obtain a receipt from MorphoTrust showing your 
fingerprints were taken.  
  
Keep your receipt and make a copy of it. 
Step 7: 
Mail the copy of your receipt to:  
BPS Office of Human Capital 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor  
Boston MA 02119 
MISCELLANEOUS  
a) All individuals covered by the Boston Public Schools CORI 
Policy must submit an annual CORI Acknowledgment Form 
within ten days or following a request from the Office of 
Human Capital. 
b) A CORI Acknowledgment Form is valid for one year from the 
date the individual signs the form or until the conclusion of 
a subject’s employment, whichever comes first, and must be 
maintained for a minimum of one year from the date of 
execution. Within the year, the Boston Public Schools may 
submit an additional request for CORI but will first provide a 
72-hour written notice. If the individual objects to an 
additional CORI, the CORI Acknowledgment Form becomes 
invalid. However, the Boston Public Schools may make an 
adverse employment decision based on an individual’s 
objection to a request for CORI. Criminal history information 
will be maintained confidentially, on a need-to-know basis 
only, by the Office of Human Capital. A limited number of 
designated individuals will routinely review criminal history 
information. The Office of Human resourcesdesignee(s) will 
receive and maintain all properly obtained criminal history 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 13 of 32 
 
information and will keep the assistant superintendent of 
Human resourcesinformed.  
c) CORI information will remain segregated and secured from 
all personnel files or other personnel information. Hard 
copies will be stored in a locked, secured location. If the 
Boston Public Schools retains electronic copies of CORI 
reports, then the Boston Public Schools will password 
protect and encrypt the reports. The reports will not be 
maintained for more than seven (7) years after the 
employee’s last date of employment or after the final 
decision not to hire the candidate. 
d) For any adverse decision based on the criminal background 
check results, the individual will be notified immediately, 
either in person or by telephone, fax, email, or letter.  
e) CORI information may be used only to further the protection 
of children and for no other purpose. Access to such 
information shall be obtained in accordance with Mass. Gen 
Laws c. 6, §§167 to 168, inclusive. Improper use of CORI 
information is both a civil and a criminal offense and may 
subject an employee to discipline. 
 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 14 of 32 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Labor Relations 
Department: 
Office of Labor Relations 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-1576 
Email: 
OLR@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 15 of 32 
 
TABLE A 
Crime Name 
MGL 
ABANDON CHILD UNDER 10, RESULTING IN DEATH c. 119, § 39 
ABUSE OF PATIENT IN LONG TERM CARE FACILITY c. 265, § 38 
ANIMALS, CRUELTY TO 
c. 272, § 77 
ARMED CAREER CRIMINAL 
c. 269, § 10G 
ARSON OF DWELLING HOUSE 
c. 266, § 1 
ASSAULT, AGGRAVATED 
c. 265, § 13A(b) 
ASSAULT & BATTERY, DANGEROUS WEAPON, 
AGGRAVATED 
c. 265, § 15A(c) 
ASSAULT & BATTERY, DANGEROUS WEAPON, 
VICTIM 60 AND OLDER 
c. 265, § 15A(a) 
ASSAULT & BATTERY ON CHILD 
c. 265, § 13J 
ASSAULT & BATTERY ON ELDER OR PERSON WITH 
DISABILITY 
c. 265, § 13K 
ASSAULT & BATTERY, INTIMIDATION, 
RACE/COLOR/RELIGION 
c. 265, §§ 39(a) and 
39(b) 
ASSAULT & BATTERY ON PERSON WITH 
INTELLECTUAL DISABILTY 
c. 265, § 13F 
ASSAULT WITH INTENT TO MURDER OR ROB, 
ARMED 
c. 265, § 18(b) 
ASSAULT WITH INTENT TO MURDER OR ROB, 
VICTIM 60 AND OLDER, ARMED 
c. 265, § 18(a) 
ASSAULT IN DWELLING, ARMED 
c. 265, § 18A 
ASSAULT BY DANGEROUS WEAPON, VICTIM 60 
AND OLDER 
c. 265, § 15B(a) 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 16 of 32 
 
ASSAULT WITH INTENT TO MURDER OR MAIM 
c. 265, § 15 
ASSAULT WITH INTENT TO RAPE 
c. 265, § 24 
ASSAULT WITH INTENT TO RAPE CHILD UNDER 16 
c. 265, § 24B 
BREAKING AND ENTERING NIGHT, 
BLDG/SHIP/MOTOR VEHICLE, INTENT TO COMMIT 
FELONY 
 
c. 266, § 16 
CARJACKING, ARMED 
c. 265, § 21A 
CHILD IN NUDE OR SEXUAL ACT, POSE/EXHIBIT OR 
DISTRIBUTE MATERIAL 
c. 272, §§ 29A and 29B 
CHILD ENTICEMENT 
c. 265, § 26C 
CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATION, BODILY INJURY 
c. 265, § 37 
CRIMINAL HARASSMENT, SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE 
c. 265, § 43A(B) 
DRUGS, DISTRIBUTE TO MINOR 
c. 94C, § 32F 
DRUGS, TRAFFICKING IN COCAINE 
c. 94C, § 32E(b)(1)-(4) 
DRUGS, TRAFFICKING IN HEROIN 
c. 94C, § 32E(c)(4) 
DRUGS, TRAFFICKING IN MARIJUANA 
c. 94C, § 32E(a)(4) 
ELDER/DISABLED, PERMIT ABUSE ON 
c. 265, § 13K(a ½) 
EXPLOSION, MALICIOUS 
c. 266, §  102B  
(c. 266, §101 prior to 
July 15, 2010) 
 
EXTORTION 
c. 265, § 25 
FIREARM, ARMED CAREER CRIMNAL 
c. 269, § 10G 
HOME INVASION 
c. 265, § 18C 
IDENTITY FRAUD 
c. 266, § 37E 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 17 of 32 
 
INCEST 
c. 272, § 17 
INDECENT ASSAULT & BATTERY ON PERSON 14 OR 
OVER 
c. 265, § 13H 
INDECENT ASSAULT & BATTERY ON CHILD UNDER 
14 
c. 265, § 13B 
INDECENT ASSAULT & BATTERY ON CHILD UNDER 
14, AGGRAVATED 
c. 265, § 13B½ 
INDECENT ASSAULT & BATTERY ON CHILD UNDER 
14, AGGRAVATED, SUBSEQUENT EVENT 
c. 265, § 13B¾ 
INDECENT ASSAULT & BATTERY ON 
DIABLED/PERSON OVER 60 
c. 265, § 13K 
INDECENT ASSAULT & BATTERY ON RETARDED 
PERSON 
c. 265, § 13F 
KIDNAPPING 
c. 265, § 26 
KIDNAPPING MINOR BY RELATIVE, ENDANGER 
SAFETY 
c. 265, § 26A 
MANSLAUGHTER (Voluntary or Involuntary) 
c. 265, § 13 
MAYHEM 
c. 265, § 14 
MURDER 
c. 265, §§ 1 and 2 
OBSCENE PICTURES, DISTRIBUTING 
c. 272, §§ 28 and 29 
OBSCENE MATERIALS HARMFUL TO MINOR, 
DISTRIBUTE OR POSSESS WITH INTENT TO 
DISTRIBUTE 
c. 272, § 28 
PHOTOGRAPH UNSUSPECTING NUDE PERSON/ 
PHOTOGRAPH OF UNSUSPECTING NUDE PERSON, 
DISSEMINATE 
c. 272, §§ 105(b) and (c) 
c.272, §§104(b) and (c) 
prior to March 7, 2014 
PRESCRIPTION; FORGERY, ALTER, SUBSEQUENT 
OFFENSE 
c. 94C, § 33(c) 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 18 of 32 
 
PROSTITUTION, DERIVE SUPPORT FROM 
c. 272, § 7 
PROSTITUTION, DERIVE SUPPORT FROM CHILD 
c. 272, § 4B 
PROSTITUTION, INDUCE MINOR TO 
c. 272, § 4A 
PROSTITUTION, MAINTAIN HOUSE OF 
c. 272, § 6 
PROSTITUTION/UNLAWFUL SEX/ABDUCT PERSON 
FOR 
c. 272, § 2 
PROSTITUTION/SOLICITATION (With Person under 
18);  
PROSTITUTION/SOLICITATION (With person under 
14);  Prior to February 19, 2012  
c. 272, § 53A(b) 
RAPE 
c. 265, § 22(b) 
RAPE, AGGRAVATED 
c. 265, § 22(a) 
RAPE & ABUSE OF A CHILD, AGGRAVATED 
c. 265, § 23A 
RAPE & ABUSE OF A CHILD, AGGRAVATED, 
SUBSEQUENT EVENT 
c. 265, § 23B 
RAPE OF CHILD WITH FORCE 
c. 265, § 22A 
RAPE OF CHILD WITH FORCE, AGGRAVATED 
c. 265, § 22B 
RAPE OF CHILD WITH FORCE, AGGRAVATED, 
SUBSEQUENT EVENT 
c. 265, § 22C 
RAPE OF CHILD (STATUTORY) 
c. 265, § 23 
RECKLESS ENDANGERMENT TO CHILDREN 
c. 265, § 13L 
ROBBERY, ARMED 
c. 265, § 17 
SEX OFFENDER, FAILURE TO REGISTER 
c. 6, § 178H(a) 
SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH CHILD UNDER 18, PAY 
FOR OR FOR FEE; SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH CHILD 
UNDER 14, PAY FOR OR FOR A FEE; Prior to 
February 19, 2012  
c. 272, § 53A(b) 
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE, ADMINISTER DRUGS FOR 
c. 272, § 3 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 19 of 32 
 
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE, INDUCE MINOR 
c. 272, § 4 
STALKING 
c. 265, § 43(a) 
STALKING IN VIOLATION OF RESTRAINING ORDER c. 265, § 43(b) 
UNNATURAL ACTS WITH CHILD UNDER 16 
c. 272, § 35A 
VIOLATE DOMESTIC PROTECTIVE ORDER 
c. 208, § 34C 
VIOLATION OF PROTECTIVE ORDER (209A) 
c. 209A, § 7 
WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION 
c. 266, § 102C 
CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT ANY OF THE ABOVE 
TABLE A CRIMES 
c. 274, § 7 
 
 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 20 of 32 
 
ACCESSORY BEFORE THE FACT OF ANY OF THE 
ABOVE TABLE A CRIMES 
c. 274, § 2 
ATTEMPT TO COMMIT ANY OF THE ABOVE TABLE A 
CRIMES 
c. 274, § 6 
 
 
 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 21 of 32 
 
TABLE B 
 
Crime Name 
 
MGL 
Felony or 
Mis-demeanor 
ABANDON CHILD UNDER 10 
c. 119, § 39 
M 
ACCESSORY AFTER FACT (VARIABLE) 
c. 274, § 4 
F 
ACCOSTING; LEWD & LASCIVIOUS 
CONDUCT; INDECENT EXPOSURE 
c. 272, § 53 
M 
AFFRAY, SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE AFFRAY 
(Prior to August 1, 2009) 
c. 272, § 53  
M 
AID ESCAPE FROM CUSTODY 
c. 268, § 17 
M 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, SELL/DELIVER 
TO PERSON UNDER 21 
c. 138, § 34 
M 
ALIEN IN POSSESS OF FIREARM 
c. 140, § 131H 
M 
ASSAULT 
c. 265, § 13A(a) 
M 
ASSAULT WITH INTENT TO ROB, 
UNARMED 
c. 265, § 20 
F 
ASSAULT & BATTERY 
c. 265, § 13A(a) 
M 
ASSAULT & BATTERY ON PUBLIC 
SERVANT/POLICE OFFICER 
c. 265, § 13D 
M 
ASSAULT & BATTERY ON CORRECTIONAL 
OFFICER 
c. 127, § 38B 
F 
ASSAULT & BATTERY DANGEROUS 
WEAPON 
c. 265, § 15A(b) 
F 
ASSAULT BY DANGEROUS WEAPON 
c. 265, § 15B(b) 
F 
ASSAULT WITH HYPODERMIC NEEDLE, 
SYRINGE 
c. 265, § 15C(a) 
F 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 22 of 32 
 
ASSAULT & BATTERY WITH HYPODERMIC 
NEEDLE, SYRINGE 
c. 265, § 15C(b) 
F 
ATTEMPT TO INJURE DEPOSITORY OF 
VALUABLES 
c. 266, § 16 
F 
BETTING; TAKING, ALLOWING 
c. 271, § 17 
M 
BODY ARMOR, USE OF IN COMMISSION 
OF FELONY 
c. 269, § 10D 
F 
BOMB SCARE /HIJACK THREAT 
c. 269, § 14 
F 
BOMB/EXPLOSIVES, UNLAWFUL 
POSSESSION 
 
 
c. 266, §102.  
c. 148, § 35 prior 
to July 15, 2010 
F 
(M prior to July 
15, 2010) 
BREAKING AND ENTERING DAY, INTENT 
TO COMMIT FELONY, PERSON IN FEAR 
c. 266, § 17 
 
F 
BREAKING AND ENTERING DAY, INTENT 
TO COMMIT FELONY 
c. 266, § 18 
F 
BREAKING AND ENTERING RAILROAD 
CAR 
c. 266, § 19 
F 
BREAKING AND ENTERING TRUCK, 
INTENT TO COMMIT FELONY 
c. 266, § 20A 
F 
BREAKING AND ENTERING, INTENT TO 
COMMIT MISDEMEANOR 
c. 266, § 16A 
M 
BRIBERY OF A POLICE OFFICER 
(state/local official or member of the 
judiciary) 
c. 268A, § 2 
F 
BRIBERY/GIFTS TO INFLUENCE 
BUSINESS AFFAIRS 
c. 271, § 39 
F 
BURGLARIOUS TOOLS, MAKE OR 
POSSESS 
c. 266, § 49 
F 


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 23 of 32 
 
BURGLARIOUS TOOLS, MOTOR VEHICLE 
MASTER KEY, MAKE OR POSSESS 
c. 266, § 49 
F 
BURGLARY, ARMED 
c. 266, § 14 
F 
BURGLARY, UNARMED 
c. 266, § 15 
F 
BURNING BUILDING 
c. 266, § 2 
F 
BURNING MOTOR VEHICLE OR 
PERSONAL PROPERTY 
c. 266, § 5 
F 
BURNING TO DEFRAUD INSURANCE CO. c. 266, § 10 
F 
BURN MOTOR VEHICLE, WILLFUL & 
MALICIOUS 
c. 266, § 127 
F 
CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATION, NO BODILY 
INJURY 
c. 265, § 37 
M 
COMPOUNDING OR CONCEALING 
FELONY 
c. 268, § 36 
F 
CONTRIBUTE TO DELINQUENCY OF 
CHILD 
c. 119, § 63 
M 
CONFINE OR PUT IN FEAR TO STEAL OR 
ATTEMPT TO STEAL 
c. 265, § 21 
F 
CREDIT CARD, LARCENY OR MISUSE OF 
c. 266, § 37B 
M 
CREDIT CARD, UNAUTHORIZED USE, 
OVER $250 
c. 266, § 37C 
F 
CRIMINAL HARASSMENT 
c. 265, § 43A(a) M 
DANGEROUS WEAPON, CARRYING 
c. 269, §§ 10(b) 
and 10(d) 
 
F 
DANGEROUS WEAPON, UNLAWFUL 
POSSESSION 
c. 269, § 10(b) 
F 
DEFACEMENT OF REAL OR PERSONAL 
PROPERTY 
c. 266, § 126A 
F 


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 24 of 32 
 
DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY OVER $250, 
MALICIOUS 
c. 266, § 127 
F 
DISORDERLY CONDUCT 
c. 272, § 53 
M 
DRUGS, LARCENY FROM AUTHORIZED 
PERSON 
c. 94C, § 37 
F 
DRUGS, FAILURE TO KEEP RECORDS 
c. 94C, § 15 
M 
DRUGS, ILLEGAL POSSESSION CLASS C 
SUBSTANCE 
c. 94C, § 34 
M 
DRUGS, ILLEGAL POSSESSION CLASS D 
SUBSTANCE 
c. 94C, § 34 
M 
DRUGS, ILLEGAL POSSESSESSION CLASS 
E SUBSTANCE 
c. 94C, § 34 
M 
DRUGS, DISPENSE WITHOUT 
PRESCRIPTION OR WHEN NOT 
REGISTERED 
c. 94C, § 25 
M 
DRUG PARAPHENELIA, DISTRIBUTE OR 
INTEND TO DISTRIBUTE 
c. 94C, § 32I(a) 
M 
DRUG PARAPHENELIA, SELL TO MINOR 
c. 94C, § 32I(B) 
F 
DRUGS, MANUFACTURE/DISTRIBUTE 
CLASS A SUBSTANCE 
c. 94C, § 32 
F 
DRUGS, MANUFACTURE/DISTRIBUTE 
CLASS B SUBSTANCE 
c. 94C, § 32A 
F 
DRUGS, MANUFACTURE/DISTRIBUTE 
CLASS C SUBSTANCE 
c. 94C, § 32B 
F 
DRUGS, MANUFACTURE/DISTRIBUTE 
CLASS D SUBSTANCE 
c. 94C, § 32C 
F 
DRUGS, MANUFACTURE/DISTRIBUTE 
CLASS E SUBSTANCE 
c. 94C, § 32D(a) M 


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 25 of 32 
 
DRUGS, 
MANUFACTURE/DISTRIBUTE/DISPENSE 
CLASS B SUBSTANCE 
c. 94C, § 32A 
F 
DRUGS, 
MANUFACTURE/DISTRIBUTE/DISPENSE 
CLASS A SUBSTANCE IN, ON, OR NEAR 
SCHOOL/PARK 
 
c. 94C, § 32J 
 
F 
DRUGS, 
MANUFACTURE/DISTRIBUTE/DISPENSE 
CLASS B SUBSTANCE IN, ON, OR NEAR 
SCHOOL/PARK 
 
c. 94C, § 32J 
 
F 
DRUGS, MOTOR VEHICLE HOMICIDE, 
NEGLIGENT OPERATION 
c. 90, § 24G(b) 
F 
DRUGS, POSSESS CLASS A SUBSTANCE 
c. 94C, § 34 
M 
DRUGS, POSSESS CLASS A SUBSTANCE, 
INTENT TO DISTRIBUTE 
c. 94C, § 32(a) 
F 
DRUGS, POSSESS CLASS B SUBSTANCE 
c. 94C, § 34 
M 
DRUGS, POSSESS CLASS B SUBSTANCE, 
INTENT TO DISTRIBUTE 
c. 94C, § 32A(a) F 
DRUGS, POSSESS CLASS C SUBSTANCE, 
INTENT TO DISTRIBUTE 
c. 94C, § 32B(a) F 
DRUGS, POSSESS CLASS C SUBSTANCE, 
SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE 
c. 94C, § 34 
M 
DRUGS, POSSESS CLASS D SUBSTANCE, 
INTENT TO DISTRIBUTE 
c. 94C, § 32C(a) M 
DRUGS, POSSESS CLASS D SUBSTANCE, 
SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE 
c. 94C, § 34 
M 
DRUGS, POSSESS CLASS E SUBSTANCE, 
INTENT TO DISTRIBUTE 
c. 94C, § 32D 
M 


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 26 of 32 
 
DRUGS, POSSESS CONTROLLED 
SUBSTANCE WITH INTENT TO 
DISTRIBUTE, SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE 
 
c. 94C, § 32(b) 
 
F 
DRUGS, POSSESS COUNTERFEIT 
SUBSTANCES WITH INTENT TO 
DISTRIBUTE 
 
c. 94C, § 32G 
 
M 
DRUGS, POSSESS CLASS A SUBSTANCE 
WITH INTENT TO DISTRIBUTE IN, ON, OR 
NEAR SCHOOL/PARK  
 
c. 94C, § 32J 
 
F 
DRUGS, POSSESS CLASS B SUBSTANCE 
WITH INTENT TO DISTRIBUTE IN, ON, OR 
NEAR SCHOOL/PARK  
 
c. 94C, § 32J 
 
F 
DRUGS, POSSESS CLASS D SUBSTANCE 
WITH INTENT TO DISTRIBUTE IN, ON, OR 
NEAR SCHOOL/PARK  
 
c. 94C, § 32J 
 
F 
DRUGS, TRAFFICKING IN COCAINE IN, 
ON, OR NEAR SCHOOL/PARK  
c. 94C, § 32J 
F 
DRUGS, TRAFFICKING IN HEROIN IN, ON, 
OR NEAR SCHOOL/PARK  
c. 94C, § 32J 
F 
DRUGS, TRAFFICKING IN MARIJUANA IN, 
ON, OR NEAR SCHOOL/PARK  
c. 94C, § 32J 
F 
DRUGS, UNLAWFULLY OBTAINING 
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE, FALSE 
PRESCRIPTION, FRAUD, FALSE 
REGISTRATION 
c. 94C, § 33 
F 
EMBEZZLEMENT 
c. 266, §§ 51-52, 
55-59 
F 


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 27 of 32 
 
ENTER WITHOUT BREAKING, 
BLDG/SHIP/MOTOR VEHICLE, INTENT TO 
COMMIT A FELONY, PERSON IN FEAR 
c. 266, § 17 
F 
ENTER WITHOUT BREAKING A 
DWELLING IN NIGHT, INTENT TO COMMIT 
FELONY 
c. 266, § 18 
F 
ENTER WITHOUT BREAKING, TRUCK, 
WITH INTENT TO COMMIT FELONY 
c. 266, § 20A 
F 
ESCAPE BY PRISONER 
c. 268, § 16 
F 
ESCAPE, FURLOUGH 
c. 268, § 16 
F 
EXPLOSIVES, THROWING 
c. 266, § 102 
F 
EXPLOSIVES, THROW/PLACE/EXPLODE 
OR POSSESS WITH INTENT TO INJURE 
 
c. 266, § 102 
 
F 
FIREARM, CARRYING LOADED 
RIFLE/SHOTGUN 
c. 269, § 12D(a) 
M 
FIREARM, CARRYING LOADED OR 
UNLOADED FIREARM ON A PUBLIC WAY; 
UNENCLOSED CASE 
 
c. 269, § 12D(b) 
 
F 
FIREARM, DISCHARGE WITHIN 500 FT. 
OF A BUILDING 
c. 269, § 12E 
M 
FIREARM, DISCHARGE WITHIN 500 FT. 
OF A DWELLING OR NEAR HIGHWAY 
 
c. 131, § 58 
 
M 
FIREARM LICENSE/ID CARD, FALSE 
c. 140, § 131I 
F 
FIREARM, POSSESS WITHOUT FIREARMS 
ID 
c. 269, § 10(h) 
M 
FIREARM, POSSESS OF, SERIAL/ID 
NUMBER OBLITERATED 
c. 269, § 11C 
F 


Page 28:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 28 of 32 
 
FIREARM, POSSESS OF, SERIAL/ID 
NUMBER OBLITERATED, USED IN 
COMMISION OR ATTEMPTED 
COMMISION OF A FELONY 
 
c. 269, § 11B 
 
F 
FIREARM, SELL WITHOUT LICENSE 
c. 140, § 128 
F 
FIREARM, SHOTGUN, BARREL UND 18 
“SAWED OFF”, POSSESS, SUBSEQUENT 
OFFENSE 
c. 269, § 10(d) 
F 
FIREARM, SHOTGUN, BARREL UND 18 
“SAWED OFF”, POSSESS 
c. 269, § 10(c) 
F 
FIREARM UNATTENDED 
c. 269, § 10(h) 
F 
FIREARM, UNLAWFUL POSSESSION, 
COMMISSION FELONY 
c. 265, § 18B 
F 
FIREARM, SHOTGUN, UNLAWFUL 
POSSESSION 
c. 140, § 129C 
M 
FIREARM VIOLATION, CARRY WITH 
AMMUNITION 
c. 269, § 10(n) 
M 
FORGED INSTRUMENT, UTTER 
c. 267, § 5 
F 
FUGITIVE FROM JUSTICE 
c. 276, § 19 
M 
GUN PERMIT, FALSE INFORMATION FOR c. 140, § 129 
M 
HOAX DEVICE/SUBSTANCE, 
POSSESS/TRANSPORT/USE 
c. 266, § 102A ½; 
c. 266, §102 
prior to July 15, 
2010 
 
F 
INDECENT EXPOSURE 
c. 272, § 53 
M 
INFERNAL MACHINE, POSSESS 
c. 266, § 102A 
c. 266, §102 
prior to July 15, 
2010 
F 


Page 29:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 29 of 32 
 
KIDNAPPING MINOR BY RELATIVE 
c. 265, § 26A 
M 
KILL BEAST, WILLFUL & MALICIOUS 
c. 266, § 112 
F 
LARCENY, MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAILER c. 266, § 28 
F 
LARCENY, PERSON 
c. 266, § 25 
F 
LARCENY, PERSON 65+ 
c. 266, § 25 
F 
LARCENY BY CHECK UNDER $250 
c. 266, § 37 
M 
LARCENY BY CHECK OVER $250 
c. 266, § 37 
F 
LARCENY FIREARM 
c. 266, § 30 
F 
LARCENY IN BLDG, SHIP, VESSEL, OR RR 
CAR 
c. 266, § 20 
F 
LARCENY IN TRUCK/TRAILER 
c. 266, § 20B 
F 
LARCENY OVER $250 
c. 266, § 30 
F 
LARCENY UNDER $250 
c. 266, §30 
M 
LARCENY, BANK EMPLOYEE OR OFFICER c. 266, § 52 
F 
LEAVE SCENE AFTER PERSONAL INJURY, 
MOTOR VEHICLE 
c. 90, § 
24(2)(a1/2)(1) 
M 
LEWD & LASCIVIOUS CONDUCT 
c. 272, § 53 
M 
LEWDNESS, OPEN & GROSS 
c. 272, § 16 
F 
LIQUOR, PROCURE FOR MINOR 
c. 138, § 34 
M 
MACHINE OR SAWED OFF SHOT GUN, 
POSSESSION OF 
c. 269, § 10(c) 
F 
MACHINE GUN, POSSESSION OF 
WITHOUT LICENSE 
c. 269, § 10(c) 
F 
MANSLAUGHTER BY OPERATING UNDER 
THE INFLUENCE 
c. 265, § 13 ½ 
F 
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE (MEDICAID) 
FRAUD 
c. 118E, § 40 
F 


Page 30:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 30 of 32 
 
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE (MEDICAID) 
KICKBACK 
c. 118E, § 41 
F 
MOTOR VEHICLE HOMICIDE, RECKLESS 
OPERATION 
c. 90, § 24G(b) 
F 
MOTOR VEHICLE HOMICIDE, UNDER 
INFLUENCE DRUGS, NEGLIGENT OR 
RECKLESS 
c. 90, § 24G(a) 
F 
MOTOR VEHICLE, USE OF IN 
COMMISSION OF FELONY 
c. 90, § 24(2)(a) F 
MOTOR VEHICLE HOMICIDE, UNDER 
INFLUENCE LIQUOR 
c. 90, § 24G(b) 
F 
MOTOR VEHICLE HOMICIDE, UNDER 
INFLUENCE LIQUOR, NEGLIGENT OR 
RECKLESS 
c. 90, § 24G(b) 
F 
MOTOR VEHICLE, OPERATING AFTER 
LICENSE REVOKED FOR DRUNK DRIVING 
c. 90, § 23 
M 
MOTOR VEHICLE, OPERATING UNDER 
INFLUENCE OF DRUGS, ALCOHOL 
c. 90, § 
24(1)(a)(1) 
M 
MOTOR VEHICLE, OPERATING UNDER 
INFLUENCE OF DRUGS, ALCOHOL, 3rd 
AND SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE 
c. 90, § 
24(1)(a)(1) 
 
F 
MOTOR VEHICLE, OPERATING UNDER 
INFLUENCE OF DRUGS, LIQUOR, 3rd AND 
SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE 
c. 90, § 24 
F 
MOTOR VEHICLE, TAKE WITHOUT 
AUTHORITY, STEAL PARTS 
c. 266, § 28 
F 
OBSCENE MATERIALS, POSSESS WITH 
INTENT TO DISTRIBUTE 
c. 272, § 29 
F 
OBSCENE LITERATURE, SELL TO MINOR 
c. 272, § 28 
F 


Page 31:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 31 of 32 
 
OBSTRUCTION OF JUSTICE 
Common law 
M [See c. 279, § 5 
re: penalty for 
Common Law 
Crimes.] 
PERJURY 
c. 268, § 1 
F 
PRESCRIPTION; FORGERY, ALTER 
c. 94C, § 33(b) 
F 
PRESCRIPTION, UTTER FALSE 
c. 94C, § 33 
F 
PRISONER, DELIVER ARTICLES TO OR 
FROM INMATE 
c. 268, § 31 
F 
PRISONER, DELIVER DRUGS TO 
c. 268, § 28 
F 
PROSTITUTION/SOLICITATION 
c. 272, § 53A 
M 
PROSTITUTION, ENGAGING IN SEX 
“JOHN” 
c. 272, § 53A 
M 
PROSTITUTION, KEEP HOUSE OF 
c. 272, § 24 
M 
PROSTITUTE, SOLICIT FOR 
c. 272, § 8 
M 
RESISTING ARREST 
c. 268, § 32B 
M 
RIOT 
c. 269, § 1 
M 
ROBBERY, UNARMED 
c. 265, § 19(b) 
F 
ROBBERY, UNARMED, VICTIM 60+ 
c. 265, § 19(a) 
F 
SHOPLIFTING, 3rd OR SUBSEQUENT 
OFFENSE 
c. 266, § 30A 
M 
STOLEN PROPERTY, RECEIVE, OVER $250 c. 266, § 60 
F 
STOLEN MOTOR VEHICLE, RECEIVE/BUY c. 266, § 28(a) 
F 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRAUD 
c. 166, § 42A 
M 
TELEPHONE CALLS, ANNOYING OR 
OBSCENE 
c. 269, § 14A 
M 
UNNATURAL ACTS 
c. 272, § 35 
F 


Page 32:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP09 
Page 32 of 32 
 
VANDALIZE 
CHURCH/SYNAGOGUE/CEMETERY 
c. 266, § 127A 
F 
VANDALIZE 
SCHOOL/CHURCH/EDUCATIONAL BLDG 
c. 266, § 98 
F 
WITNESS, INTIMIDATE OR RETALIATE 
AGAINST 
c. 268, § 13B 
F 
CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT ANY OF 
ABOVE TABLE B CRIMES 
 
 
ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT ANY OF THE 
ABOVE TABLE B CRIMES 
 
 
ACCESSORY BEFORE ANY OF THE 
ABOVE TABLE B CRIMES 
 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PP15 
Version 01 
SICK LEAVE DONATION PROGRAM 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Boston Public Schools will be continuing the Sick Leave Donation 
Program with Administrative Guild, BASAS, BTU, managerial, and 
School Police Patrolmen's Association. 
PURPOSE 
The Sick Leave Donation Program is a voluntary program where 
eligible employees can donate sick leave hours to help a seriously 
ill or injured colleague who has exhausted their sick, personal, 
vacation, and/or compensatory leave entitlements. An eligible 
employee who wants to withdraw hours from the Sick Leave 
Bank must be on an approved leave of absence. Please refer to 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 for more information 
regarding the process to apply for a leave of absence. If time is 
awarded by the Sick Leave Donation Committee, recipients can 
withdraw sick leave hours from the leave bank and maintain 
active pay status. 
Membership and eligibility requirements by unit are detailed in 
the attachment. 
THE DONATION PROCESS 
When the sick leave bank for a union/group becomes depleted, 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP15 
Page 2 of 12 
 
an email notification will be sent to all members requesting the 
donation of an additional day(s). All employees who wish to enroll 
will be required to complete an online form during the 
aforementioned period.  All donations are irrevocable.               
SICK LEAVE COMMITTEE 
The leave committee for each union/group will consist of six 
members: three administrative members from the union/group 
and three administrative members from the Boston Public 
Schools district (appointed by the superintendent or their 
designee). A majority vote (4 of 6) is required to grant awards of 
sick leave time. All decisions are made on a case-by-case basis. 
APPLICATION PROCESS FOR SICK BANK MEMBERS 
1. Complete a Sick Leave Bank Donation Withdrawal Request 
form, including submission of medical documentation and a 
letter stating the reason for the request in accordance with 
the application deadline listed on the form. 
2. The Leave Bank Committee will meet and review all 
pertinent information. Committee will render a decision and 
Human Capital will inform the employee and supervisor of 
the decision.  
3. If approved, the Office of Human Capital representative will 
add donated hours to the recipient’s leave accrual balance 
in PeopleSoft.  
4. Withdrawals from the leave bank cease when the recipient 
has either returned to work or withdrawn the maximum 
number of hours allotted from their union or conditions of 
employment.       
There is no appeal procedure. The decision of the Sick Leave 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP15 
Page 3 of 12 
 
Bank Committee is final. 
APPLICATION DEADLINE 
The Sick Bank Oversight Committee meets on the first 
Wednesday of each month. 
To be included on the agenda, your application, along with all 
supporting documentation, must be submitted by the close of 
business on the preceding Friday. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Manager of Employee Information Systems 
Department: 
Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9649 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
ohr@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP15 
Page 4 of 12 
 
ATTACHMENT A: 
SICK LEAVE DONATION PROGRAM: MEMBERSHIP 
REQUIREMENTS AND ELIGIBILITY BY UNIT 
BASAS 
 
Membership Requirements:  
• To establish this program, there must be at least 50 eligible 
BASAS employees who participate in it. 
• A BASAS employee must be permanent or entering their 
third consecutive year of Boston Public Schools service to be 
eligible to participate. 
• A BASAS employee must donate one sick day (eight hours) 
to enroll in the program. 
• Donation days (hours) will be deducted from the donor’s 
accumulated sick leave balance. 
Eligibility for Recipient: 
• Only BASAS employees who have donated to the sick leave 
donation program are eligible to apply for sick leave time. 
• Applicants for sick leave time must have exhausted all 
accumulated sick and personal leave to be eligible to 
receive sick leave donations. 
• Recipients may use donated sick leave only for work time 
lost due to personal illness. Recipients may not use donated 
time for absences caused by an illness of a family member.   
• The application form for sick time must be completed and 
accompanied by adequate medical evidence, pursuant to 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13, Employee Sick Leave 
Policy. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP15 
Page 5 of 12 
 
• For employees receiving benefits pursuant to a disability 
plan, the combination of disability payments and donated 
sick days may not, on a day-to-day basis, equal more than 
the employee’s daily rate of pay. 
• For employees receiving workers’ compensation benefits, 
the combination of workers’ compensation payments and 
donated sick days may not, on a daily basis, equal more than 
the employee’s daily rate of pay. 
• Provided there is available sick leave in the bank, the 
committee has the authority to grant up to 30 days of sick 
leave to a recipient per school year. In exceptional 
circumstances, the committee may also grant additional 30-
day increments, up to a maximum of 90 days (including the 
original 30 days). 
• Requests for sick leave time may not be made retroactively. 
• Days that have been granted but are not used will revert to 
the sick leave bank. 
BOSTON TEACHERS UNION (BTU) 
Membership Requirements:  
• To establish this program, there must be at least 500 
teacher unit members and 100 paraprofessional unit 
members. 
• Must be a BTU member to participate in the program. 
• Teacher unit members must be permanent or entering their 
fourth consecutive year of service.  Paraprofessional 
members must have at least three consecutive years of 
service.   
• Must donate one sick day for inclusion in the program. 
• Donations will be deducted from the donor’s accumulated 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP15 
Page 6 of 12 
 
sick leave balance. 
• Donations and withdrawals can only be in the same BTU 
unit (e.g., teachers cannot donate to or withdraw from the 
paraprofessional unit; paraprofessionals cannot donate to or 
withdraw from the teacher unit). 
Eligibility for Recipient: 
• Must have exhausted all accumulated sick leave and other 
paid leaves (e.g., personal days, etc.). 
• Application for the BTU sick bank withdrawal must be 
accompanied by adequate medical evidence, pursuant to 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13, Employee Sick Leave 
Policy, of a serious illness, which prevents the employee’s 
immediate return to work. 
• For those individuals who have a disability plan, the 
combination of disability payment and sick bank days do 
not, on a day-to-day basis, equal more than the daily rate of 
pay. 
• For those individuals who are receiving worker’s 
compensation, the combination of workers’ compensation 
payment and sick bank days do not, on a daily basis, equal 
more than the daily rate of pay. 
• Provided there is available sick leave in the bank, the 
committee has the authority to grant up to 30 days of sick 
leave to a recipient. In exceptional circumstances, the 
Committee may also grant additional 30-day increments, up 
to a maximum of 90 days (including the original 30 days). 
• Requests/withdrawals cannot be made retroactively. 
• Days requested and granted but not used will revert to the 
sick leave bank. 
• This program is for employees only and cannot be used for 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP15 
Page 7 of 12 
 
the illness of family members. 
• This program does not meet for the months of June – 
September for the following reasons: 
o June: The bank only issues donations in 30-day 
increments and the month of June does not have 30 
school days. 
o July – August: Employees do not work these months 
and therefore would not be eligible to use 
sick/personal time. 
o September: Employees receive sick/personal 
entitlements up front and therefore, would have time 
to use at the beginning of the school year. 
CUSTODIAN 
Membership Requirements: 
• To establish this program, there must be at least 100 
Custodian Bank members. 
• Must be a custodian to participate. 
• Must have completed three or more years of continuous 
service with the union to be eligible. 
• Must donate two sick days for the first year, and thereafter 
one sick day annually during enrollment period. 
• Donation days will be deducted from an employee’s sick 
leave balance.  
Eligibility for Recipient: 
• Only employees who have donated to the sick leave bank 
will be eligible to apply for sick leave bank time. 
• Employees must have exhausted all accumulated sick leave 
and other paid time. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP15 
Page 8 of 12 
 
• The bank is for employees’ illness only and cannot be used 
for illness of family members. 
• All requests for sick leave bank grants must be submitted in 
writing, accompanied by medical certification. 
• Individuals who have a disability plan and are receiving 
disability payments or who are receiving worker’s 
compensation payments will be eligible for sick leave bank 
grants such that in combination with the sick leave bank 
payment the amount shall not exceed the individual’s daily 
rate of pay. 
• Individuals are eligible to receive up to 30 days of sick leave 
time at one time and may request an additional 30 days, for 
a maximum of 60 days. 
• Time granted and not used shall revert to the sick leave 
bank. 
ADMINISTRATIVE GUILD 
Membership Requirements: 
• To establish this program, there must be at least 100 Guild 
bank members.   
• Must be Administrative Guild members to participate. 
• Must have completed three or more years of continuous 
service to be eligible to participate. 
• Must donate one sick day to enroll in the program. 
• Donation day will be deducted from an employee’s sick 
leave balance. 
Eligibility for Recipient: 
• Only employees who have donated to the sick leave bank 
will be eligible to apply for sick leave bank time. 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP15 
Page 9 of 12 
 
• Employees must have exhausted all accumulated sick leave 
and other paid time. 
• The bank is for employee’s illness only and cannot be used 
for illness of family members. 
• All requests for sick leave bank grants must be submitted in 
writing, accompanied by medical certification. 
• Individuals who have a disability plan and are receiving 
disability payments or who are receiving workers’ 
compensation payments will be eligible for sick leave bank 
grants such that in combination with the sick leave bank 
payment the amount shall not exceed the individual’s daily 
rate of pay. 
• Individuals are eligible to receive up to 30 days of sick leave 
time at one time and may request an additional 30 days, for 
a maximum of 60 days. 
• Time granted and not used shall revert to the sick leave 
bank. 
MANAGEMENT 
Membership Requirements: 
• To establish this program, there must be at least 100 eligible 
Managerial employees who participate in it. 
• A Managerial employee must be permanent or entering 
their fourth consecutive year of Boston Public Schools 
service to be eligible to participate. 
• A Managerial employee must donate one sick day (eight 
hours) to enroll in the program. 
• Donation days (hours) will be deducted from the donor’s 
accumulated sick leave balance. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP15 
Page 10 of 12 
 
Eligibility for Recipient: 
• Only Managerial employees who have donated to the sick 
leave donation program are eligible to apply for sick leave 
time. 
• Applicants for sick leave time must have exhausted all 
accumulated sick, personal, and vacation leave to be eligible 
to receive sick leave donations. 
• Recipients may use donated sick leave only for work time 
lost due to personal illness. Recipients may not use donated 
time for absences caused by an illness of a family member.   
• The application form for sick time must be completed and 
accompanied by adequate medical evidence, pursuant to 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13, Employee Sick Leave 
Policy, of a serious illness. 
• For employees receiving benefits pursuant to a disability 
plan, the combination of disability payments and donated 
sick days may not, on a day- to-day basis, equal more than 
the employee’s daily rate of pay.   
• For employees receiving worker’s compensation benefits, 
the combination of worker’s compensation payments and 
donated sick days may not, on a daily basis, equal more than 
the employee’s daily rate of pay. 
• Provided there is available sick leave in the bank, the 
committee has the authority to grant up to 30 days of sick 
leave to a recipient. In exceptional circumstances, the 
committee may also grant additional 30-day increments, up 
to a maximum of ninety 90 days (including the original 30 
days). 
• Requests for sick leave time may not be made retroactively. 
• Days that have been granted but are not used will revert to 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP15 
Page 11 of 12 
 
the sick leave bank. 
SCHOOL POLICE PATROLMEN ASSOCIATION  
Membership Requirements: 
• To establish this program, there must be at least 25 
Association bank members.   
• Must be association members to participate. 
• Must have completed three or more years of continuous 
service to be eligible to participate. 
• Must donate one sick day to enroll in the program. 
• Donation day will be deducted from an employee’s sick 
leave balance. 
Eligibility for Recipient: 
• Only employees who have donated to the sick leave bank 
will be eligible to apply for sick leave bank time. 
• Employees must have exhausted all accumulated sick leave 
and other paid time. 
• The bank is for employee’s illness only and cannot be used 
for illness of family members. 
• All requests for sick leave bank grants must be submitted in 
writing, accompanied by medical certification. 
• Individuals who have a disability plan and are receiving 
disability payments or who are receiving workers’ 
compensation payments will be eligible for sick leave bank 
grants such that in combination with the sick leave bank 
payment the amount shall not exceed the individual’s daily 
rate of pay. 
• Individuals are eligible to receive up to 30 days of sick leave 
time at one time and may request an additional 30 days, for 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP15 
Page 12 of 12 
 
a maximum of 60 days. 
• Time granted and not used shall revert to the sick leave 
bank. 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PM07 
Version 01 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF CLASSROOM 
PARAPROFESSIONALS 
EMPLOYEES COVERED BY THIS CIRCULAR: 
● Coverage Paraprofessional  
● Instructional Paraprofessional 
● One-to-One Paraprofessional 
● Surround Care Paraprofessional 
FORMAL EVALUATION 
All staff shall be formally evaluated using standards and 
indicators reasonably related to a paraprofessional performance, 
with a mark for each standard and an overall rating.  Overall 
ratings shall be “Exemplary,” “Proficient,” “Needs Improvement,” 
and “Unsatisfactory,” and shall be transmitted to 
paraprofessionals by the last business day prior to May 15 via the 
VectorEvals platform. A paraprofessional may sign the evaluation 
digitally only if the paraprofessional does so on a BPS-issued 
computer. If the paraprofessional does not have access to a BPS-
issued computer, the form must be printed from VectorEvals for 
their signature and then uploaded as a PDF attachment to the 
digital form. 
Paraprofessionals will generally be evaluated formally every two 
years, except as set forth in section (7) of Schedule, Meetings, and 
Procedures below.  During each school year, each principal/head 
of school or their designee will identify approximately one-half of 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07 
Page 2 of 8 
 
the staff for which that administrator is responsible for evaluating 
during that year.  The process of identifying the evaluees will be 
determined by the responsible administrator.  An administrator 
may also evaluate a staff member not originally identified if 
assistance, supervision, or intervention is deemed appropriate 
based on informal observation. 
EVALUATORS 
1. No supervisor shall supervise or evaluate a relative. 
2. the head of school, principal, or other administrative head 
outside of the bargaining unit will be responsible for all 
evaluations.  However, they may be assisted by other 
qualified persons (who are not members of the bargaining 
unit) designated by the School Department. 
SCHEDULE, MEETINGS, AND PROCEDURES 
1. At the beginning of each school year, the responsible 
building administrator or their designee shall meet with 
paraprofessionals for the purpose of explaining the 
evaluation program and instrument and answering 
questions.  The building administrator may be assisted by 
other qualified persons designated by the School 
Department.  Classroom visits may be a combination of 
announced and unannounced observations. 
For any classroom visit resulting in written feedback 
indicating a deficiency in the paraprofessional’s practice, the 
responsible supervisor shall provide such written feedback 
to the paraprofessional before releasing the next formative 
or summative evaluation. 
2. If a paraprofessional’s performance results in an overall 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07 
Page 3 of 8 
 
Formative Evaluation or Summative Evaluation rating of 
“Needs Improvement” or “Unsatisfactory,” the evaluation 
prescription may contain a requirement that the 
paraprofessional take advantage of additional professional 
development training or other opportunities offered by or 
through the School Department to correct a weakness or 
deficiency which caused the less than proficient rating. 
Formative refers to evaluations that at a minimum are 
twenty (20) school days apart. 
Regardless of the rating mark, within ten (10) school days 
following the last observation used as the basis of the 
evaluation, the responsible building administrator (or 
designee) shall meet with the paraprofessional to discuss 
the evaluation.  At this meeting, the paraprofessional will be 
given two (2) copies of the written evaluation, signed, and 
dated by the responsible building administrator.  
The paraprofessional shall sign and return one (1) copy to 
indicate having received it, but not to indicate agreement or 
disagreement.  No paraprofessional shall be asked to sign an 
incomplete evaluation form.  Paraprofessionals shall be 
allowed to attach their written comments to the evaluation 
form.  A paraprofessional whose overall performance is 
determined less than “Proficient” at any point during the 
school year shall be notified in writing and shall meet 
directly with the responsible building administrator. 
 
3. In any area where the responsible building administrator or 
their designee indicates a need for improvement, they will 
provide the paraprofessional with a written prescription.  
The paraprofessional may attach comments to the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07 
Page 4 of 8 
 
prescription.      
If the paraprofessional continues to need improvement after 
allowing adequate time to improve, the responsible 
administrator may include a prescription in the evaluation 
that the paraprofessional may voluntarily take the 
opportunity of additional training or in-service training to 
correct a deficiency.  
4. If a paraprofessional receives an “Unsatisfactory” on at least 
four (4) formative evaluations within a twelve (12) month 
period in which the paraprofessional reported to work, or on 
at least two (2) formative evaluations plus a summative 
evaluation, the principal/head of school may initiate 
termination by recommending to the superintendent that 
the paraprofessional be terminated. If the superintendent 
approves the head of school’s/principal’s recommendation, 
the principal/head of school shall notify the paraprofessional 
in writing of their intent to dismiss the paraprofessional. The 
paraprofessional may then request a meeting with the 
principal/head of school to discuss their intent to dismiss. 
This request must be made in writing within ten (10) days of 
the paraprofessional’s receipt of the intent to dismiss notice. 
Overall “Unsatisfactory” evaluation ratings need not occur in 
consecutive months. 
An overall rating of “Unsatisfactory” on a summative 
evaluation must be preceded by a rating of “Unsatisfactory” 
on at least two (2) formative evaluations during that school 
year. A paraprofessional may be removed from the 
classroom, dismissed, or suspended for just cause prior to 
the completion of the prescriptive period specified in this 
paragraph.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07 
Page 5 of 8 
 
5. After each of the first three (3) formative evaluation overall 
“Unsatisfactory” ratings that are based in whole or in part 
upon classroom performance, the responsible building 
administrator shall conduct a follow-up evaluation.  This 
evaluation shall include observation of classroom 
performance and take place no sooner than twenty (20) 
school days and no later than fifty (50) school days after the 
previous “Unsatisfactory” evaluation.  
If an overall formative evaluation “Unsatisfactory” rating is 
based upon grounds other than classroom performance, 
then the responsible administrator must clearly convey the 
reasons in writing to the paraprofessional and follow 
prescribed procedures for progressive discipline.  
6. A formative or summative evaluation with an overall 
“Unsatisfactory” rating shall be maintained as a permanent 
part of the employee’s personnel record and may be grieved 
and arbitrated. An employee may grieve a summative 
evaluation with an overall rating other than “Unsatisfactory” 
up to but not beyond the level of the Step 2 hearing officer, 
who shall have the authority to rectify the grievance. Any 
such grievance shall be dealt with expeditiously.  In the 
event of a concurrent dismissal, the grievances shall be 
merged and treated as a single grievance. 
 
Notwithstanding the above, disputes concerning the 
paraprofessional's rating in any of the individual standards 
found within a formative or summative evaluation not 
resulting in an overall "Unsatisfactory" rating are neither 
grievable nor arbitrable. Similarly, disputes concerning 
comments made by the responsible administrator within an 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07 
Page 6 of 8 
 
observation or formative and summative evaluation are 
neither grievable nor arbitrable. 
7. The following individuals shall be evaluated annually by the 
last business day prior to November 15 if possible: 
a. Paraprofessionals who were evaluated during the 
previous school year as “Unsatisfactory” overall or in a 
particular area. 
b. All paraprofessionals who are new to the building. 
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07 
Page 7 of 8 
 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
By the last business day 
prior to November 15 
● Evaluation of paraprofessionals who 
received an “Unsatisfactory” in their 
evaluation from the prior school year. 
● Evaluation p who are new to the school 
building. 
By the last business day 
prior to May 15  
● Deadline to submit evaluation on 
VectorEvals platform.  
A paraprofessional may sign the 
evaluation digitally only if the 
paraprofessional does so on a BPS-
issued computer. If the 
paraprofessional does not, the form 
must be printed from VectorEvals for 
them to sign and then uploaded as a 
PDF attachment to the digital form.  
● Evaluation of paraprofessionals due 
every 2 years (except for 
paraprofessionals new to the building 
or who received an “Unsatisfactory” 
rating the previous school year). 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07 
Page 8 of 8 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Evaluation and Performance 
Management 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Boston, 
MA 02119 
 
 
Email: 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org 
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
► Click to view a SAMPLE Classroom Paraprofessional 
Evaluation Form (PDF). Evaluators should use VectorEvals to 
submit their evaluations. 
 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
HRS-PP14 
Version 01 
 
PAID LEAVE FOR CANCER SCREENING AND/OR LIVING 
ORGAN DONATION 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Two additional paid leave benefits are available to City of Boston 
employees for annual cancer screenings and living organ 
donations. 
ANNUAL CANCER SCREENING 
The mayor has signed an executive order that allows all City of 
Boston employees to use up to four (4) hours of leave per 
calendar year for various types of cancer screening.  (Types of 
cancer screening that fall under the four hours off per year policy 
are as follows: breast, prostate, colon, skin, thyroid, oral cavity, 
lymph nodes, reproductive organs, and lungs). 
The following procedure is in effect in the Boston Public Schools: 
• Employees will be allowed up to four (4) hours of leave, per 
calendar year, that can be used intermittently or in one (1) 
four-hour period. 
• Employees must make a request through their 
Responsibility Center manager. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP14 
Page 2 of 4 
 
• A signed copy of a medical document verifying the date that 
the employee was given a cancer screening must be filed 
with the Responsibility Center manager. 
• This time is not charged to any accumulated sick leave; and 
time in position, creditable service, pay, leave and health 
benefits are all protected while on this type of leave.  
To report time for an annual cancer screening, please add an 
absence event on the timesheet using the absence name “Pre-
Cancer Screening.” 
LIVING ORGAN DONATION 
Effective October 3, 2006, the mayor has issued an executive 
order adopting An Act Relative to Living Organ Donation which 
grants leave of absence without loss of pay for living organ 
donation.  It applies to leave taken by an employee to provide live 
organ donation to be transplanted into another individual. Live 
organ donation includes donation of kidney, liver, pancreas, lung, 
intestine, or heart (domino transplants). 
All City of Boston employees are eligible for this leave, which 
includes full-time, part-time, seasonal, and temporary employees 
eligible for paid leave benefits. It does not include independent 
contractors, substitutes, cab monitors, transportation attendants, 
intermittent, or any other employees who are not eligible for paid 
leave benefits.  
The following procedure is in effect in the Boston Public Schools: 
• Employees will be allowed a maximum total of 30 days of 
paid leave in a calendar year to donate an organ.   
• This time only covers days taken for the medical procedure 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP14 
Page 3 of 4 
 
and the recovery from it.  
• Part-time employees will receive a prorated portion of the 
30 days based on their part-time schedule. 
• Leave can be used intermittently. 
• Employee must obtain a letter on a physician’s letterhead 
disclosing that the employee is approved to be a live organ 
donor and the type of organ being donated. 
• A signed copy of a medical document verifying the date of 
the living organ donation procedure that the employee has 
undergone must be submitted to Human Resources 
through their Responsibility Center manager (e.g., principal 
or department head). 
• This time is not charged to any accumulated sick leave; time 
in position, creditable service, pay, leave, and health benefits 
are protected while on this type of leave.  
To report time for a living organ donation, please add an 
absence event on the timesheet using the absence name 
“Organ Donation.” 
Questions on specific health insurance coverage should be 
directed to Health Benefits and Insurance at 617-635-4570 or to 
your health insurance provider. More information about live 
organ donation may be found at the following link: 
https://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/resources/living-donation  
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP14 
Page 4 of 4 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Employee Services 
Department: 
Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9255 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
ohrleaves@bostonpublicschools.org  
  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PM10 
Version 01 
 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF ABA SPECIALISTS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version 
 
The following sets forth the coverage, philosophy, roles and 
responsibilities and procedures applicable to the evaluation 
process of Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) specialists.  
I. COVERAGE 
The performance management process covers all ABA specialists. 
The evaluation process relates to the duties and responsibilities 
of the employee’s position, as set forth in the employee’s job 
description.  
II. PHILOSOPHY 
Performance management is one of the key processes driving 
the comprehensive reform of the Boston Public Schools. The 
performance management process for ABA specialists is 
designed to: (a) align the work of ABA specialists with the 
superintendent’s district wide priorities and with team goals and 
(b) improve the work performance of ABA specialists. 
III. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES  
The performance management process for ABA specialists will 
be led by the assistant superintendent of special education, 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 2 of 25 
 
 
assistant director for ABA, and program directors for ABA. ABA 
specialists will be evaluated by their immediate supervisors 
unless the assistant director designates another person to 
conduct the evaluation. 
A supervisor’s failure to address the job performance problems of 
their staff through the performance evaluation process 
represents unacceptable performance for which the supervisor 
will be held accountable. Further, a supervisor will also be 
performing unsatisfactorily if an underperforming staff member 
is given a “Proficient” rating and then the staff member is 
encouraged to transfer to another school or department. A 
supervisor who does this will be held accountable as part of their 
performance evaluation. 
IV. DIAGNOSIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  
The performance evaluation process should provide each 
employee with an appraisal of their strengths and identify areas 
in need of improvement. The employee will be evaluated on each 
standard within the various categories.  
There are four possible ratings: 1) Unsatisfactory; 2) Needs 
Improvement; 3) Proficient; and 4) Exemplary.  
V. PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT PROCESS 
Supervisors will conduct evaluations of their ABA specialists every 
year. The period for the performance evaluation for ABA 
specialists will cover September 1 – August 30 of the school year 
in which the employee is being evaluated. A supervisor may 
evaluate staff members more frequently if they choose to do so 
but must complete no fewer than 5 (five) direct observations over 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 3 of 25 
 
 
the course of the school year.   
Supervisors are expected to provide timely written feedback to 
their staff members, especially for employees who, upon 
observation, are not meeting the expectations of the supervisor. 
An employee who is not meeting their supervisor’s expectations 
should have been informed of the supervisor’s concerns and 
provided recommendations for improvement through written 
feedback before the performance evaluation meeting and should 
be given a reasonable amount of time to address the observed 
deficient performance.  
Step 1 – REVIEW GOALS AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
PLAN FOR THE COMING SCHOOL YEAR (September-October)   
Supervisors will meet individually with each of their ABA 
specialists to jointly review the employee’s goals and professional 
development plan for the September 1 - August 30 period. When 
possible, goal development should be done during the prior 
year’s performance evaluation meeting. 
During this meeting, the employee and their supervisor should 
review the employee’s job description to ensure the employee’s 
goals and professional development plans are in alignment with 
the job description.  
If there is a change in the employee’s goals and professional 
development plan after the prior year’s performance evaluation 
meeting, the revised goals and professional development plan 
must be documented.      


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 4 of 25 
 
 
Step 2 – PREPARE DIAGNOSIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS (as 
needed)  
If at any time, including at the interim evaluation meeting (see 
step 3), a supervisor finds that an employee needs major 
improvement in their job performance or in accomplishing any 
goal, the supervisor will prepare a written diagnosis of the 
situation and make recommendations for improvement.   
The supervisor must share their written feedback with the 
employee within a reasonable amount of time, and thereafter 
should meet at least monthly with the employee to discuss their 
job performance. These meetings must be held until the 
employee’s job performance meets the supervisor’s expectations. 
If the employee’s job performance does not improve sufficiently, 
the employee may be separated from employment.   
Step 3 – COMPLETE STAFF OBSERVATIONS AND DATA CHECKS 
(September-May) 
As outlined in the ABA specialist evaluation, at least 5 (five) 
observations must be completed prior to the final performance 
evaluation in May. These observations must include direct 
observation of the ABA specialist performing essential job 
functions and working with students. The observations may or 
may not be announced and can occur at any time throughout 
the year. Following each observation session, the program 
director for ABA will provide written and vocal feedback to the 
ABA specialist outlining the strengths and areas of growth seen 
during the observation. 
As part of each observation, data checks and programming 
analyses will be conducted. These data checks will assess the 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 5 of 25 
 
 
performance with programming and data entry for some portion 
of the time between observations. 
Step 4 – HOLD INTERIM EVALUATION MEETING (February-
March).  
ABA specialists will submit a formative self-assessment no later 
than February 10. This self-assessment will include the ABA 
specialist’s assessment of their work performance and feedback 
from previous observations to be incorporated into the interim 
evaluation. 
Supervisors will hold an interim evaluation meeting with each of 
their ABA specialists no later than March 1. During this meeting, 
the supervisor must give oral feedback on (1) the employee’s 
progress in achieving their goals, and (2) the employee’s overall 
job performance, especially with reference to the employee’s job 
description and customer focus. In addition, a written interim 
evaluation will be provided in a timely manner after the interim 
evaluation meeting. 
Step 5 – COMPLETE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION FORMS (May).  
The supervisor will prepare a performance evaluation on each 
ABA specialist each school year by filling out the Performance 
Evaluation Form – ABA Specialists attached at the end of this 
circular. 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 6 of 25 
 
 
Step 6 – CONDUCT PERFORMANCE EVALUATION MEETING 
(June) 
 
The supervisor will meet with the employee to discuss their 
performance evaluation. The meeting will cover the employee’s 
job performance, their progress toward their annual goals, and 
their overall performance.  
During this meeting, based on the employee’s performance 
evaluation, the supervisor and employee should establish the 
employee’s goals for the coming school year. These goals should 
be tentative if the department’s (and team’s) goals have not been 
set. Similarly, the supervisor and employee should also discuss 
the employee’s professional development plan for the coming 
school year, with particular reference to the areas of growth or 
challenge identified in the performance evaluation.        
Step 7 – EMPLOYEE ACKNOWLEDGEMENT AND RESPONSE 
The employee’s signature on the evaluation instrument 
acknowledges receipt, and not necessarily agreement with the 
content of the evaluation. The employee may provide a written 
response to the evaluation within 10 (ten) days of receiving the 
performance evaluation form. 
Step 8 – SUBMIT PERFORMANCE EVALUATION FORMS TO 
HUMAN RESOURCES (June)  
The supervisor will submit completed performance evaluation 
forms to Human Resources no later than June 1. Step increases 
are automatic.  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 7 of 25 
 
 
Step 9 – FOLLOW UP FOR AN EMPLOYEE WHO RECEIVES AN 
“UNSATISFACTORY” RATING 
If an ABA specialist receives an “Unsatisfactory'' rating on their 
performance evaluation, the supervisor should meet with the 
employee at least monthly to discuss their job performance. 
These meetings must be held until the employee’s job 
performance meets the supervisor’s expectations. If the 
employee’s job performance does not improve sufficiently, the 
employee may be separated from employment.  
VII. PROCEDURES FOR DISCIPLINE 
If a supervisor determines that an ABA specialist has committed 
an infraction of work rules, the supervisor should follow the 
procedures outlined in Superintendent’s Circular – Employee 
Discipline Procedures (see footnote below)1. Additionally, the 
supervisor may consider the infraction in evaluating the 
employee’s overall performance. 
VIII. FORMS 
The Performance Evaluation Form – ABA Specialists is attached. 
 
 
 
(Footnote) Refer to Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP10 
“Employee Discipline Procedures” under the category “Human 
Resources” on the Superintendent’s Circulars page of the BPS 
website for more information. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 8 of 25 
 
 
IX. SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
STEP INCREASES ARE AUTOMATIC. Please adhere to the given 
deadlines for submission. 
 
Date 
Activity 
September 1 - 
October 15 
Finalize goals and professional 
development plan for the coming year 
Monthly, as needed 
and outlined in a 
performance 
improvement plan 
Prepare diagnosis and 
recommendations 
No later than 
February 10 
Request self-assessment 
February 1 - March 1 
Hold Formative Evaluation meeting 
No later than May 31 
Complete Performance Evaluation forms 
No later than May 31 
Conduct Summative Performance 
Evaluation meeting 
No later than June 1 
Submit Performance Evaluation forms to 
Human Resources 
Monthly, as needed 
and outlined in a 
performance 
improvement plan 
Follow up for an employee who receives 
an “Unsatisfactory” rating 
 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 9 of 25 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Assistant Director for Applied Behavior 
Analysis 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-8599 
Email: 
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 10 of 25 
 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION FORM 
ABA SPECIALISTS 
 
Name of Employee: ______________________________________________  
Employee Identification #:________________________________________  
Department: ABA 
School: ___________________________________________________________  
Position:  ABA specialist 
Evaluator: ________________________________________________________  
 
SECTION I: JOB PERFORMANCE 
Please rate the employee’s performance according to the 
following competencies, as measured by documented 
opportunities.  A documented opportunity will consist of written 
feedback from a program director as a result of a direct 
observation or data analysis from work products. Documented 
opportunities will include no fewer than 5 measured 
opportunities for each subcategory listed below.   
Each objective was rated in one of four categories: 
 
1 
Unsatisfactory 
Employee meets the objective for 65% or less 
of documented opportunities. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 11 of 25 
 
 
2 Needs 
Improvement 
Employee meets the objective for 66% to 75% 
of documented opportunities. 
3 Proficient 
Employee meets the objective for 76 to 85% 
of documented opportunities. 
4 Exemplary 
Employee meets the objective for 86% or 
greater of documented opportunities.  
*The numbers listed above will be what is indicated in the rating 
box for each area in the evaluation below. 
 
A. Data Collection 
A-1:  Accurately conducts and implements 
all required assessments, including 
preference assessments, Skills 
Assessments, and Core Skills Assessments. 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
A-2:  Accurately updates targets as needed, 
and proactively implements any 
programmatic changes given by the 
program director or strand specialist. 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
A-3:  Accurately takes programmatic data (both behavior and 
acquisition) in a timely manner. 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 12 of 25 
 
 
Self Sup  
 
 
Unsatisfactory 
Runs less than 24 ACE sessions per 
week across all programs and 
students per week across 5 or more 
measured opportunities for the year. 
 
 
Needs 
Improvement 
Runs between 25 and 49 ACE 
sessions per week across all 
programs and students per week 
across 5 or more measured 
opportunities for the year. 
 
 
Proficient 
Runs between 50 and 74 sessions 
per week across all ACE programs 
and students across 5 or more 
measured opportunities for the year. 
 
 
Exemplary 
Runs at least 75 sessions per week 
across all ACE programs and 
students across 5 or more measured 
opportunities for the year. 
 
 
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 13 of 25 
 
 
 
A-4:  Follows prompting hierarchies and 
error correction procedures as prescribed by 
ACE and/or Program Director. 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
A-5:  Ensures that challenging behavior data 
collection sheets are updated as necessary, 
and that challenging behavior data 
collection sheets are filed in the correct 
place. 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
A-6:  Identifies when there is a problem with 
data/data collection, and appropriately 
brings to the attention of the Program 
Director. 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
Overall Comments on Data Collection: 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 14 of 25 
 
 
B. Behavior Support 
B-1:  Develops, maintains, and shares any 
necessary materials to follow through with 
behavior plans (token boards, timers, visuals, 
etc.) as written. 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
B-2:  Follows each Behavior Support Plan as 
written for student, including effective 
antecedent strategies, reinforcement 
procedures, following crisis procedures, and 
seeking help when needed. 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
B-3:  Responds to any behaviors not outlined 
in the behavior support plan using standard 
ABA techniques. 
 
 
 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
Overall Comments on Behavior Support: 
 
 
 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 15 of 25 
 
 
C. Professionalism 
C-1:  Participates in feedback sessions and 
accepts feedback given by Program Director.  
Engages in consultation with Program 
Director and/or Strand Specialist.  
Communicates with the Strand Specialist, 
Program Director, and other school-based 
staff, including keeping student schedules 
up to date, sharing with all necessary parties, 
and following the set schedule.  Is flexible 
when caseloads or school assignment 
requires change, due to caseload demands 
or due to specific needs of a student or 
students.  If there is a concern regarding 
caseload and/or programmatic changes, 
professionally communicates the concern to 
the Program Director.   
*This language does not constitute 
expansion of caseloads beyond the contract 
limits 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
C-2:  Follows Office of Special Education 
administrative procedures, such as signing 
in/out, requesting absences (sick or personal 
days) on ESS in a timely manner, using 
planning time effectively, following cell 
phone use policy, and arriving to 
work/meetings on time.  
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 16 of 25 
 
 
C-3:  Consistently exudes a professional 
disposition towards Special Education, 
Applied Behavior Analysis, students, and 
families, as well as other school personnel; 
and maintains student confidentiality. 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
C-4:  Demonstrates fluent use of technology 
necessary to complete job requirements, 
such as Google Drive, EdPlan, ACE, Teach 
Now, etc. Ensures that all appropriate 
technology is up to date. 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
C-5:  Engages in and attends all professional 
development activities as scheduled, 
including all that were described in the prior 
year’s professional development plan. 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
Overall Comments on Professionalism: 
 
 
 
 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 17 of 25 
 
 
D. Direct Service 
D-1:  Ensures that tasks are prepared and 
ready for instruction on time and efficiently. 
Demonstrates fluency with materials 
necessary to conduct direct service sessions, 
such as token boards, first/then boards, etc. 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
D-2:  Activates appropriate programs as 
outlined in the IEP within 2 weeks of 
notification of a signed IEP, and implements 
all programs as written on the curriculum 
sheet across multiple settings including 
inclusion, specials, lunch/recess, etc. 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
D-3:  Establishes attending and reinforcers 
before beginning the session. Prompts 
functional communication as necessary. 
Completes the prescribed number of trials for 
each program according to the prescription 
sheet. Keeps student break time to a 
reasonable duration. 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
 
 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 18 of 25 
 
 
 
D-4:  Ensures that the student is clear on 
how and when reinforcement is delivered, 
and delivers reinforcement on prescribed 
schedules.  
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
D-5:  Builds rapport with the students and is 
always engaging and energetic when 
working with students.  
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
Overall Comments on Direct Service: 
 
 
 
 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 19 of 25 
 
 
E. Communication/Written Skills 
E-1:  Completes progress reports and annual 
reviews at least 1 week before the due date, 
by referencing the ABA specialist Task Due 
Google Calendar when applicable and using 
planning time effectively. Ensures that each 
document is complete with proper spelling, 
grammar, and data, following the most 
recent format provided by the program 
directors.  
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
E-2:  Completes EdPlan session notes within 
24 hours of each session and takes no more 
than 10 minutes per 60-minute session to do 
so. 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
E-3:  Ensures that written communications 
are clear, concise, and free of error, utilizing 
appropriate professional language.  
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
 
 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 20 of 25 
 
 
E-4:  Communicates questions and concerns 
in a professional manner with teachers, ABA 
specialists, strand specialists, program 
directors, and paraprofessionals, as 
demonstrated by initiation and response to 
emails within 48 hours. 
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
E-5:  Responds to emails within 2 working 
days and completes RMTS (Random Moment 
Time Study) moments within the 48 hour 
timeline as required by state agencies.  
Self Rating 
 
Supervisor Rating 
 
 
Overall Comments on Communication/Written Skills: 
 
 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 21 of 25 
 
 
SECTION II: PERFORMANCE AGAINST PAST YEAR’S GOALS 
Provide a concise description of each of the employee’s goals for 
the past year.  Mark whether the employee achieved the goal. 
Provide specific data supporting your assessment that the goal 
was or was not achieved.  
 
Goal 1:   <ENTER GOAL> 
To what extent did the employee achieve this goal? 
 Met 
Did not meet 
Description of results and comments: 
 
 
Goal 2:  <ENTER GOAL> 
To what extent did the employee achieve this goal? 
 Met 
Did not meet 
Description of results and comments: 
 
 
Goal 3:  <ENTER GOAL> 
To what extent did the employee achieve this goal? 
 Met 
Did not meet 
Description of results and comments: 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 22 of 25 
 
 
SECTION III: GOALS FOR NEXT YEAR 
Please list the employee’s goals for next year. Goals are to be set 
by supervisor and agreed to by employee.  These goals should 
align with the department’s goals and priorities and include key 
performance indicators. 
Goal 1: 
 
Goal 2: 
 
Goal 3: 
 
 


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 23 of 25 
 
 
SECTION IV: OVERALL PERFORMANCE 
Please rate the employee’s overall performance this year. If the 
employee receives a “Does Not Meet Expectations” rating, their 
supervisor must provide a diagnosis and recommendations for 
how the employee must improve their performance in the 
following Additional Comments section. The supervisor may also 
use this section to provide other additional comments on the 
employee’s performance. 
 
 Unsatisfactory     
 Proficient     
 Needs Improvement     
 Exemplary 
 
Comments: 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 24 of 25 
 
 
SECTION V: PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
Describe the employee’s Professional Development Plan for the 
coming year. This plan should help the employee build skills 
and/or knowledge to accomplish their goals for the year. Please 
describe the specific areas that the employee is trying to develop, 
and the related activities that they will take part in this year. 
 
1. Skill/Knowledge Development Area 1: 
 
Related activities to help develop skill: 
 
 
 
2. Skill/Knowledge Development Area 2: 
 
Related activities to help develop skill: 
 
 
 
3. Skill/Knowledge Development Area 3: 
 
Related activities to help develop skill: 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM10 
Page 25 of 25 
 
 
SECTION VI: ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
 ____________________________________________  ____________________  
 
Evaluator’s Signature 
Date 
 
 
 ____________________________________________  ____________________  
 
Employee’s Signature 
Date 
 
The employee’s signature indicates that they have seen the 
evaluation and acknowledge that it will be placed in their 
personnel file, but it does not denote agreement with the 
evaluation. 
 
 
 
The employee may provide a written response to the evaluation 
in the space provided below, and/or in attached pages. 
 
Employee Comments: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
School Year 2023-2024 
NUMBER: 
HRS-HS06  
Version 01 
 
 
SUBSTITUTE TEACHERS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
This superintendent’s circular sets forth information regarding 
the employment and professional development of substitute 
teachers.  
USE OF THE AUTOMATED BPS SMARTFIND EXPRESS SYSTEM 
(SUBCENTRAL) 
► All schools are required to use BPS SubCentral for substitute 
needs. This will allow the school's central administration to 
understand and better manage operations. This will also 
allow OHC to monitor and accurately report fill rates as well 
as recruit for hard-to-fill vacancies.  
The Office of Human Resources is committed to ensuring the 
active substitute pool consists of high-quality substitute teachers. 
BPS SubCentral allows principals and heads of schools to view 
and coordinate substitute activities and view past, current, and 
future jobs for the school, helping them to better understand and 
manage absenteeism.  
BPS SubCentral is available via the Internet and mobile app 24 
hours a day, 7 days a week, from any Internet-enabled computer 
or mobile device with an Access ID and PIN. BPS SubCentral can 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS06 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
be accessed at https://bostonps.eschoolsolutions.com, or by 
telephone at 857- 254-1707. 
With BPS SubCentral, schools can create and manage their own 
preferred substitute list, create absences and vacancies, and pull 
individual reports unique to their school. Preferred substitutes 
will be contacted first about a substitute teaching opportunity. If 
the vacancy still exists after all a school’s preferred substitutes 
have been contacted, the SubCentral platform will then begin 
contacting other substitutes registered within the system. Those 
substitutes on a particular school’s ‘Do Not Use’ list will not be 
called, nor will they be able to view open substitute opportunities 
for that school.  
For more information on BPS SubCentral, please contact 
SubCentral via email at bpsSubCentral@bostonpublicschools.org.  
TYPES OF SUBSTITUTE TEACHERS  
● Degree per diem substitute teachers work day-to-day 
assignments to temporarily fill positions. Those with at least 
a bachelor's degree who are assigned to fill a position 
anticipated to be vacant for more than 20 consecutive 
workdays, but less than a full year, or who serve 
continuously for more than 20 consecutive workdays in the 
same assignment, are considered per diem substitute 
teachers covering a long-term assignment.  
o A qualified and properly licensed long-term substitute will 
be granted a provisional teacher contract on or before 
December 1st if the assignment in which they is serving 
becomes vacant for the remainder of the school year.  


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS06 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
● Non-degree per diem substitute teachers do not hold a 
bachelor's degree. The non-degree per diem substitute 
teachers work day-to-day assignments to fill positions on an 
interim basis and may not take on long-term assignments. 
● Cluster substitute teachers are assigned to a school for a full 
year to cover various teacher absences in the school, as 
needed, on a daily basis. The cluster substitute positions are 
typically created during the budget season and charged to 
the school’s budget. If schools are interested in having a 
cluster substitute for the school year, please contact your 
budget analyst and Human Resources staffing manager.  
 
MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS  
Per Diem Substitutes: 
Are required to complete the Sub Skills Basic Training Course 
online at www.STEDI.org; you must complete the course with at 
least an 85% average and submit a Sub Diploma from the course. 
Long-term Substitutes:  
Must have a bachelor’s degree and at least one of the following 
requirements:  
● A Mass. Teaching License (out of state licenses will be 
considered with teaching experience) 
● Complete the Sub Skills Basic Training Course online at 
www.STEDI.org; you must complete the course with at least 
an 85% average. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS06 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
● Two years’ teaching experience. You may additionally be 
asked to complete the Sub Skills Basic Training Course 
online at www.STEDI.org.  
● If you were successfully hired for a substitute teaching 
position and you do not hold an initial teaching license from 
the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and 
Secondary Education, you must take and pass the Utah 
Substitute Assessment test with a score of 85 or above. 
● All candidates must be fingerprinted and pass a criminal 
offender (CORI) and sexual offender (SORI) records check.  
The criminal offender/sexual offender record check 
requirement cannot be waived.  
The Substitute Teaching Institute (STEDI) of Utah State University 
created and oversees the Substitute Teacher Training Program. It 
provides 6–13 hours of sub instructor training, either online or via 
CDs, and an assessment at the completion of the program. The 
cost of the program, which will be borne by the candidate, is 
$39.95 plus shipping and includes the interactive SubInstructor 
training (included as a CD), a substitute teacher handbook, and 
the online sub assessment and SubDiploma. Information for the 
candidates is posted on the BPS website.  
SUBSTITUTE HIRING  
All hiring for substitutes will take place through the online BPS 
Career Center (TalentEd). Applicants must create a profile and 
apply to the district-wide substitute teacher job posting through 
the BPS Career Center (TalentEd). Applicants will be hired as a 
BPS per diem substitute teacher after review of their application 
in its entirety, submission of all required documentation, and 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS06 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
successful completion and passing of a background check, which 
includes fingerprinting and CORI/SORI checks.  
SUBSTITUTE TEACHER REQUEST & RECOMMENDATIONS  
Principals and heads of schools can either request or recommend 
an individual for a per diem or long-term substitute appointment 
at their specific school. To submit a per diem and long-term 
substitute, the school leader or hiring manager will need to 
submit the candidate for hire via the BPS Career Center 
(TalentEd). All school leaders and hiring managers will have 
access to the districtwide substitute job posting.  Please note: 
once the substitute has been hired, it is the responsibility of the 
school to post the absence and vacancy in SubCentral and assign 
it to the substitute as required.  
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT  
Long-term and cluster substitute teachers are required to 
participate in up to 18 hours of professional development with 
regular teachers. If this professional development is scheduled 
beyond the school day, long-term and cluster substitute teachers 
are paid for this time and are compensated through stipend 
payments provided by the school. 
New substitute teachers may also be required to attend up to 
three days of training to prepare them to teach in the Boston 
Public Schools.  
 
ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY  
Heads of schools and principals are responsible for establishing 
practices and procedures that enable substitute teachers to 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS06 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
provide students with educationally meaningful work and allow 
for the maximum educational use of the school day. As part of 
this responsibility, heads of schools and principals or their 
designees should consider providing substitute teachers with the 
following items:  
● A daily plan book, lesson plan, or other academic activity for 
all classes of the absent teacher. Heads of schools and 
principals are responsible for ensuring that all teachers 
prepare appropriately, and continually update plan books 
and lesson plans so that the lesson taught by the substitute 
teacher is consistent with the subject matter being taught 
to the class.  
● A copy of the absent teacher’s schedule, including subjects 
and levels of instruction, room assignments, administrative 
assignments, lunch, and common planning time.  
● Homeroom and class lists and seating plans.  
● A bell schedule.  
● A concise statement of school policies and procedures 
regarding the taking of attendance, modes of disciplinary 
referral, referral for illness, emergency procedures, and any 
other pertinent information a substitute teacher may need.  
● Name and location of the administrator responsible for the 
school's substitute teachers.  
 
These materials may be kept in the school office or distributed to 
substitute teachers in some other manner that is effective.  
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS06 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
BPS SubCentral 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources – Sub Central 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Additional 
Questions: 
For additional questions, please submit an HR 
Inquiry Ticket via the Beacon. This can be 
found on Access Boston (access.boston.gov). 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-15 
Version 01 
 
STUDENT SURVEYS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
A federal statute, the Protection of Pupil Rights Amendment 
(PPRA), 20 U.S.C. §1232h, affords some protections for students 
and their parents before certain student surveys are conducted.  
Many student surveys, however, will not come within the scope of 
this statute. Please assess each student survey carefully before 
administering it to determine if this policy applies. A student 
survey that is anonymous or voluntary need not comply with the 
following policy. Additionally, a student survey that is not 
developed or administered through the use of funds received 
from the United States Department of Education also does not 
need to comply with this policy. 
For those student surveys that are developed or administered 
through the use of federal education funds and in which a 
student is required to participate, the following policy applies.  
This policy applies to those surveys that ask a student to reveal 
any of the following information:  political affiliation; mental 
illness or psychological problems; sexual behavior and/or 
attitudes; illegal, self-incriminating, and demeaning behavior; 
critical appraisals of close family members; relationships to which 
a privilege is recognized, such as clergy, medical doctors, or 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-15, 2023-2024 
September 1, 2023 
Page 2 of 2 
 
attorneys; religious affiliations or beliefs; and income, other than 
for eligibility for participation in a program.  Prior to 
administering such a survey, the student’s parent or guardian 
must consent, in writing, to the student’s participation in the 
survey.  Also, a copy of the survey must be made available to the 
parent or guardian.  Any such survey should also be brought to 
the attention of the Office of Legal Advisor. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-17 
Version 01 
 
RELIGIOUS EXPRESSION IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Massachusetts General Laws chapter 71, section 82, sets forth the 
law regarding the right of students to freedom of expression in 
public schools. Freedom of expression must be balanced with 
any disruption or disorder caused to the school.  Issues related 
specifically to religious expression in public schools involve 
constantly developing concepts and questions of constitutional 
law. Therefore, staff members are strongly encouraged to bring 
specific questions of religious expression to the Office of Legal 
Advisor, 617-635-9320. 
Some general principles include: 
• Freedom of expression of individuals or groups of 
students includes the right to express their views through 
speech, symbols, peaceable and planned assembly, and 
written publications. 
• Although the First Amendment forbids religious activity 
that is sponsored by the government, it protects religious 
activity initiated by private individuals that is non-
disruptive, including student prayer before meals or 
during non-instructional time.  Such non-disruptive 
religious activity may also include speakers at student 
assemblies, extracurricular events, or graduation 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-17 
Page 2 of 2 
 
ceremonies who are selected on the basis of genuinely 
neutral, evenhanded criteria and who retain control over 
the content of their expression.  Under such 
circumstances, school officials may make neutral 
disclaimers that the speech is the speaker’s view and not 
of the school. 
• Teachers, administrators, and other school employees 
who, when acting in their official capacities, are acting as 
agents of the state and must not encourage, discourage, 
or participate in prayer or other religious expression. 
(Note: this does not include the Pledge of Allegiance, 
which is not considered religious expression; see Supt. 
Circular LGL-18.) 
• School officials may not compel students to participate in 
prayer or other religious activities. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Lisa Maki 
Department: 
Office Of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-05 
Version 01 
 
SUBPOENAS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or suspended 
by a subsequent version.. 
SUBPOENA: When receiving a subpoena for student records, 
personnel records, medical records, or any other document, a 
copy of the subpoena must be emailed or delivered 
immediately to the Office of Legal Advisor for review. 
Subsequent to that, please forward all responsive records with 
the original subpoena to the Office of Legal Advisor. Such a 
subpoena should be emailed or delivered, even if it is addressed 
to an individual, rather than the “keeper of the records.” Witness 
subpoenas (i.e., a subpoena that seeks testimony rather than 
documents) should also be emailed or delivered to the Office of 
Legal Advisor for appropriate consultation. 
 If sending by email, please email legal@bostonpublicschools.org. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-05, 2023-2024 
September 1, 2023 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-20 
Version 01 
 
CORPORAL PUNISHMENT 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
Principals and heads of school should remind staff that the use of 
corporal punishment in schools is strictly forbidden by Boston 
School Committee policy as well as by Massachusetts State Law 
G.L. c. 71, § 37G, which provides: 
(a) The power of the school committee or of any teacher or 
any other employee or agent of the school committee to 
maintain discipline upon school property shall not include 
the right to inflict corporal punishment upon any pupil.  
(b) The provisions of this section shall not preclude any 
member of the school committee or any teacher or any 
employee or agent of the school committee from using 
such reasonable force as is necessary to protect pupils, 
other persons, and themselves from an assault by a pupil. 
When such an assault has occurred, the principal shall file 
a detailed report of such with the school committee.  
(c) The board of education shall promulgate regulations 
regarding the use of physical restraint for students. Such 
regulations shall not preclude any teacher or employee or 
agent of the school from using reasonable force to 
protect pupils, other persons, and themselves from an 
assault by a pupil as set forth above in section (b). Such 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-20 
Page 2 of 2 
 
regulations shall require training of all personnel 
authorized to administer any forms of restraint. Such 
regulations shall provide for procedures for notification to 
the department and to the parents. 
Corporal punishment includes but is not limited to the following: 
• Slapping or hitting students 
• Pulling students by their arms, shoulders, etc. 
• Pushing students from one location to another 
• Forcibly causing students to sit down 
• Grasping students by any body part 
Staff may restrain students only to protect students, other 
persons, or themselves from an assault and may only use such 
force as is reasonably necessary to repel such an attack.  Violation 
of the policy and law will result in disciplinary measures and may 
result in the filing of abuse and/or criminal charges. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Office of Legal Advisor Director 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-04 
Version 01 
 
SCHOOL VISITOR GUIDELINES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
It is School Committee policy to welcome all parents and other 
visitors to our schools and to encourage their active support of 
and involvement in the schools. However, considering the 
challenges of COVID-19 and to comply with current CDC, DESE, 
and district guidelines, we are asking all members of our school 
communities to support our effort to limit traffic in our buildings 
to only assigned students, BPS staff, BPS facilities contractors, 
and approved partners as described below until further notice. 
Please see Superintendent Circular SAF-12 School Access 
Control. 
All permitted visitors, including School Department personnel, 
are expected to report to the school main office before going 
elsewhere in the building. They will be required to sign in, noting 
their name, affiliation, and reason for the visit; and before leaving, 
to sign out of the building. Visitors will be required to park in 
certain designated spaces or at certain designated times in 
school parking lots. All visitors should be informed of these 
procedures through such means as is determined by the school. 
Occasionally, visitors may disrupt school activities: by behaving 
inappropriately; by harassing staff; by shouting; or by insisting on 
visiting at inappropriate times. Every effort should be made to 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 2 of 13 
 
 
work with such visitors to inform them of established procedures 
in an effort to eliminate future disruptions. When such 
disruptions occur, however, the building administrator may issue 
the offender a Trespass Warning pursuant to M.G.L. c. 266, § 120. 
Attachment A provides an example of such a letter, with 
appropriate fields to be filled in by the building administrator. 
Such a warning requires the offending party to contact the 
building administrator, or a designee, prior to appearing at school 
for any school-related matter. Additionally, depending upon the 
nature of the inappropriate behavior, a building administrator 
may choose to substitute any of the following restrictions in the 
third paragraph of Attachment A: 
1. The visitor will be required to telephone prior to visiting the 
building to inform the building administrator of their intent 
in visiting the building. 
2. The visitor will be required to be accompanied by the 
building administrator or their designee to classrooms. 
3. Advance scheduling of consultations with teachers or other 
providers will be required. 
4. Parents delivering student[s] to school may be required to 
leave the student[s] at the front door and not be permitted 
to accompany them to the classroom. 
This warning should expire at the end of the academic year. As is 
noted on the Trespass Warning, it is appealable through the 
operational leader. 
Additionally, by issuing the Trespass Warning, the building 
administrator is placing the disruptive visitor on notice that any 
further inappropriate behavior will result in the issuance of a 
Trespass Notice. If inappropriate behaviors continue, Attachment 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 3 of 13 
 
 
B provides an example of such a trespass notice, again with fields 
to be completed by the building administrator. No Trespass 
Notice shall issue, however, without the approval of the 
superintendent or designee, which may be sought through the 
operational leader, who will contact the Superintendent’s Office. 
The Trespass Notice will be effective for one year from the date it 
was issued and may, in the reasonable exercise of the building 
administrator’s discretion and with the approval of the 
superintendent or designee, be renewed thereafter. Failure to 
comply with any restriction imposed by the Trespass Notice may 
result in the visitor’s arrest and prosecution for criminal trespass. 
Like the Trespass Warning, it is appealable at the visitor’s election 
through the operational leader. 
In instances of extreme behavior, such as assault or battery of an 
administrator, faculty member, staff member, or student, a 
building administrator with approval of the superintendent or 
designee may issue a Trespass Notice without prior issuance of a 
Trespass Warning. Attachment C is an example of such a notice. 
Such a Trespass Notice as is contained in Attachment C should 
be reserved, however, for particularly egregious behavior where 
there is a particularized apprehension for the safety or well-being 
for a member or members of the school community. Once issued, 
or until such time it is vacated, the named visitor is prohibited, 
under penalty of law, from entering or using school grounds for 
any reason. This Trespass Notice is effective immediately, and its 
duration is indefinite. A copy of this notice must be provided to 
the Boston Police Department, the Safety Office, and the Office of 
Legal Advisor, and maintained in the school’s file. A visitor’s 
failure to comply with this notice will result in immediate arrest 
and prosecution for trespassing if it is violated. This notice is 
likewise appealable through the operational leader. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 4 of 13 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Office of Legal Advisor Director 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 5 of 13 
 
 
ATTACHMENT A 
Re:  TRESPASS WARNING PURSUANT TO G. L. c. 266 § 120 
Warning notice of unacceptable conduct that incited a physical 
confrontation 
 
Dear [Visitor name]: 
By this letter I am issuing a Trespass Warning pursuant to G. L. c. 
266, § 120. As a result of [description of incident] on [date], it is 
necessary for [school name] to issue this warning to ensure the 
safety of students, school staff, and the immediate community. 
To foster and ensure effective teaching and learning, it is 
necessary to maintain an environment that is positive and free of 
disruption, so that the business of the school may be 
appropriately completed. It has been determined that your 
presence on [date] seriously disturbed the mental health of 
numerous students here at [school name]. Such conduct cannot 
be tolerated and does not reflect the type of behaviors we model 
for our students. 
We ask that you make every effort to avoid coming in or around 
the area of [school name] at the arrival or dismissal of school. Any 
further incident[s] that disrupts the mental health of other 
students by inciting a physical confrontation during the 
remainder of this academic year may next result in the issuance 
of a formal Trespass Notice under G. L. c. 266, § 120. Failure to 
comply with such a Trespass Notice would subject you to 
immediate arrest and prosecution for violation of such a trespass 
notice. 
This action is being taken on behalf of and in the best interest of 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 6 of 13 
 
 
our students, staff, and community. Please contact the school at 
[school phone number] if you wish to discuss this warning notice 
or seek other assistance. You may also contact the Operational 
Leader at [phone number] to discuss the issuance of this 
Trespass Warning, including if you dispute the reasons for its 
issuance. 
Thank you for your cooperation in this matter. 
Sincerely, 
 
[Principal or other responsibility official name]  
[Title and school]  
 
cc:  Boston Police Department 
Superintendent 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Safety Services 
School Files 
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 7 of 13 
 
 
ATTACHMENT B  
Re:  TRESPASS NOTICE PURSUANT TO G. L. c. 266, §120,  
Requiring that you not enter or use the [school name] property  
 
Dear [Visitor name]: 
As a result of [description of the incident of unacceptable 
behavior that prompted a previous warning and the current 
notice] at the [school name] on [date of original incident], it is 
necessary for me to issue this Trespass Notice pursuant to M.G.L. 
c. 266, § 120. Therefore, from the date of this notice and until such 
time as it is either vacated or for one calendar year whichever is 
first you are not allowed to be present on the premises of the 
[school name].  
Despite the warning issued on [date], a copy of which is enclosed, 
your behavior continues to disrupt the teaching and learning 
process and indeed places our students, staff, and faculty at risk 
of harm.  
I determined that your behavior on [dates of each incident for 
which a warning notice was issued and the current incident 
which prompts this Trespass Notice and describe behavior] 
seriously disturbed the school environment and the conduct of 
school activities and related school business. This cannot be 
tolerated and is contrary to the mission of the [school name]. If in 
the future you need to address particular school-related matters, 
please contact either my designee or me by telephone so that 
your concern may be addressed.  
By this letter, I am formally notifying you of the Trespass Notice. A 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 8 of 13 
 
 
copy of this notice will be provided to the Boston Police 
Department, the Department of Safety Services, Office of Legal 
Advisor, the [school name’s] file, and will be sent to you by 
regular and certified mail. This trespass notice prohibits you, 
under penalty of law, from entering or using the [school name] or 
from setting foot on school property for any reason. Failure to 
comply with this Trespass Notice shall subject you to immediate 
arrest and prosecution for violation of this Trespass Notice. This 
notice will be effective for one year from the date it was issued 
and may, in the reasonable exercise of my discretion, be renewed 
thereafter. If renewed, I will notify you in writing prior to its 
renewal. If not renewed, its effect will end one year after its 
issuance.  
I look forward to working with you in a cooperative manner. 
Please contact me at [contact telephone and email] if you wish 
to discuss this Trespass Notice or seek other assistance. You may 
also contact the operational leader [number of contact person] 
to discuss the issuance of this Trespass Notice. You may also 
contact the operational leader if you dispute the reasons for 
issuing this notice, or if, during the duration of this notice, you 
wish to seek to vacate or modify its provisions.  
This notice is likewise appealable through the operational leader.  
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 9 of 13 
 
 
Thank you for your cooperation in this matter.  
Sincerely,  
[Principal or other responsibility official name]  
[Title and school]  
 
cc:  Boston Police Department  
Superintendent  
Office of Legal Advisor  
Safety Services  
School Files 
 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 10 of 13 
 
 
ATTACHMENT C  
 
Re:  TRESPASS NOTICE, PURSUANT to G. L. c. 266, § 120,  
Requiring that you not enter or use the [school name] property  
 
Dear [Visitor name]:  
As a result of [insert detailed description of the incident of 
unacceptable behavior] at the [school name] on [date of 
incident], it is necessary for me to issue this Trespass Notice, 
pursuant to G.L. c. 266, § 120. Therefore, from the date of this 
notice, you are not allowed to be present on the premises of the 
[name of school].  
I have determined that your behavior on [date of incident] placed 
our students, staff, and faculty at risk of harm. Furthermore, your 
actions seriously disturbed both the school environment and the 
conduct of school activities and school-related business. This 
cannot be tolerated. It is contrary to the mission of the [name of 
school]. If in the future you have a need to address particular 
school-related matters, please contact either my designee or me 
by telephone so that your concerns can be addressed.  
This letter serves to formally notify you of the Trespass Notice. A 
copy of this notice has been provided to the Boston Police 
Department, the Superintendent’s Office, the Office of Legal 
Advisor, the Office of Safety Services, the [name of school]’s file, 
and to you by regular and certified mail. This Trespass Notice 
prohibits you, under penalty of law, from entering or using the 
[name of school] or from setting foot on school property for any 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 11 of 13 
 
 
reason. Failure to comply with this trespass notice shall subject 
you to immediate arrest and prosecution for violation of this 
Trespass Notice. This notice will be effective immediately, and its 
duration is indefinite.  
I look forward to working with you in a cooperative manner. 
Please contact me by telephone if you wish to discuss this 
Trespass Notice or seek other assistance. You may also contact 
the operational leader at [number of contact person] to discuss 
the issuance of this Trespass Notice, including if you dispute the 
reasons therefore.  
Thank you for your cooperation in this matter.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
[Principal or other responsibility official name]  
[Title and school]  
cc:  Boston Police Department  
Superintendent  
Office of Legal Advisor  
Safety Services  
School Files  
Enclosure [attach copy of incident report if available] 
 
Guidelines for Visiting the Boston Public Schools 
1. Until further notice, parents/guardians and staff from 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 12 of 13 
 
 
partner agencies [except for BPS facilities service 
contractors and approved partner agencies, as described 
above] will not be allowed in school buildings. 
Parents/guardians are asked to drop off and pick up their 
students on the exterior of the school building in the area[s] 
designated by the school leader/staff. 
2. ALL visitors MUST report to the school’s main office and sign 
in before going elsewhere in the building, and they must 
sign out before leaving. Some schools have a desk near the 
main entrance where visitors may sign in and out. However, 
if no one is sitting at the desk, the visitor must go to the 
main office. 
3. All visitors will receive a Visitor’s Pass when they sign in. 
They must return it to the office or sign-in desk when they 
leave. Please be sure your Visitor’s Pass is visible while you 
are in the school or schoolyard. Visitor’s passes will not be 
required at Open Houses, Parent Nights or other school-
sponsored events open to the public to the extent those 
events are held. 
4. For the safety of our students and staff, we will consider that 
visitors who do not sign in and cannot show a Visitor’s Pass 
are trespassing. A school staff member may ask them to 
leave the building and schoolyard. 
5. Visitors who want to meet with a teacher or administrator 
should contact the school via phone or email to schedule 
any discussion or virtual appointments that they would like 
to have.  
6. Teachers or staff who are expecting a visitor should notify 
the office they are expecting a visitor and provide name and 
reason prior to the visitor’s arrival. In some cases, a staff 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 13 of 13 
 
 
member may escort the visitor to the meeting place. 
7. If a student is sick/injured and needs to be picked up, school 
staff will contact the parent/guardian to make 
arrangements and escort the student to meet the 
authorized adult. 
8. It is very disruptive to the classroom for parents to pick up 
their children before the regular dismissal time. If this is 
necessary, the parent should call the school office in 
advance and pick their child up in the location designated 
by the school. Parents may not go directly to the classroom 
to pick up their child. The school will not release a student to 
anyone other than a custodial parent without the parent’s 
consent and proper identification. 
9. Occasionally, visitors may disrupt school activities by 
insisting on visiting classrooms unannounced, harassing 
staff, shouting, or using inappropriate language. If such 
disruptive behavior continues, the school administrator may 
restrict the individual’s visits or deny future access to the 
building, schoolyard, or virtual learning environment. 
10. Thank you for your cooperation in observing these 
guidelines. Be assured that our goal is to create a safe, 
secure, and positive learning experience for all our students 
and their families. 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-19 
Version 01 
 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST LAW – CITY EMPLOYEES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Attached you will find a copy of the "Summary of the Conflict of 
Interest Law for Municipal Employees," which outlines the 
standards of ethics and conduct for all city employees. This 
summary was prepared and issued by the State Ethics 
Commission, the state entity charged with enforcing 
Massachusetts’ conflict of interest law, M.G.L. c. 268A. 
Copies of this summary should be distributed to all staff and 
School Site Council members on an annual basis. It may also be 
found at this link: Summary of the Conflict of Interest law. 
All staff should be encouraged to read and be familiar with the 
law so that we all carry out our obligations honestly and fairly, 
and so that our actions are above reproach. Please use the 
attachment to this circular to make copies for your staff and 
School Site Council. 
Annually, every City employee is required by law to sign the 
acknowledgment of receipt of the attached summary via The 
Hub. Alternatively, the employee may return the signed 
acknowledgement to their supervisor for submission to the 
Office of Human Resources.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 2 of 21 
 
Furthermore, every two years, all current state, county, and 
municipal employees must complete online ethics training 
through the State Ethics Commission. New public employees 
must complete this training within 30 days of beginning public 
service, and every two years thereafter. Upon completing the 
program, employees should print out the completion certificate, 
keep a copy for themselves, and provide a copy of the completion 
certificate to Human Resources. The online training can be found 
at: 
Complete the Online Training Program for Municipal Employees | 
Mass.gov 
For specific questions regarding employment and/or individual 
activity under the conflict of interest laws should be directed to 
the Office of Legal Advisor. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 3 of 21 
 
SUMMARY OF THE CONFLICT OF INTEREST LAW FOR 
MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES 
All municipal employees must be provided with this summary of 
the conflict of interest law annually. 
All city and town employees must be provided with this 
Summary of the Conflict of Interest Law for Municipal Employees 
within 30 days of hire or election, and then annually.  All city and 
town employees are then required to acknowledge in writing 
that they received the summary. 
This summary of the conflict of interest law, General Laws 
chapter 268A, is intended to help municipal employees 
understand how that law applies to them. 
This summary is not a substitute for legal advice, nor does it 
mention every aspect of the law that may apply in a particular 
situation. Municipal employees can obtain free confidential 
advice about the conflict of interest law from the Commission's 
Legal Division at our website, phone number, and address above. 
Municipal counsel may also provide advice. 
The conflict of interest law seeks to prevent conflicts between 
private interests and public duties, foster integrity in public 
service, and promote the public's trust and confidence in that 
service by placing restrictions on what municipal employees may 
do on the job, after hours, and after leaving public service, as 
described below. The sections referenced below are sections of 
G.L. c. 268A. 
When the Commission determines that the conflict of interest 
law has been violated, it can impose a civil penalty of up to 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 4 of 21 
 
$10,000 ($25,000 for bribery cases) for each violation. In addition, 
the Commission can order the violator to repay any economic 
advantage he gained by the violation, and to make restitution to 
injured third parties. Violations of the conflict of interest law can 
also be prosecuted criminally. 
1. Are you a municipal employee for conflict of interest law 
purposes? 
You do not have to be a full-time, paid municipal employee 
to be considered a municipal employee for conflict of 
interest purposes. Anyone performing services for a city or 
town or holding a municipal position, whether paid or 
unpaid, including full- and part-time municipal employees, 
elected officials, volunteers, and consultants, is a municipal 
employee under the conflict of interest law. An employee of 
a private firm can also be a municipal employee, if the 
private firm has a contract with the city or town and the 
employee is a "key employee" under the contract, meaning 
the town has specifically contracted for her services. The law 
also covers private parties who engage in impermissible 
dealings with municipal employees, such as offering bribes 
or illegal gifts.  Town meeting members and charter 
commission members are not municipal employees under 
the conflict of interest law. 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 5 of 21 
 
2. On-the-job restrictions. 
a. Bribes. Asking for and taking bribes is prohibited. (See 
Section 2) 
A bribe is anything of value corruptly received by a 
municipal employee in exchange for the employee being 
influenced in his official actions. Giving, offering, 
receiving, or asking for a bribe is illegal. 
Bribes are more serious than illegal gifts because they 
involve corrupt intent. In other words, the municipal 
employee intends to sell his office by agreeing to do or 
not do some official act, and the giver intends to influence 
him to do so. Bribes of any value are illegal. 
b. Gifts and gratuities. Asking for or accepting a gift 
because of your official position, or because of 
something you can do or have done in your official 
position, is prohibited. (See Sections 3, 23(b)(2), and 26). 
Municipal employees may not accept gifts and gratuities 
valued at $50 or more given to influence their official 
actions or because of their official position. Accepting a 
gift intended to reward past official action or to bring 
about future official action is illegal, as is giving such gifts. 
Accepting a gift given to you because of the municipal 
position you hold is also illegal. Meals, entertainment 
event tickets, golf, gift baskets, and payment of travel 
expenses can all be illegal gifts if given in connection with 
official action or position, as can anything worth $50 or 
more. A number of smaller gifts together worth $50 or 
more may also violate these sections. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 6 of 21 
 
Example of violation: A town administrator accepts 
reduced rental payments from developers. 
Example of violation: A developer offers a ski trip to a 
school district employee who oversees the developer's 
work for the school district. 
Regulatory exemptions. There are situations in which a 
municipal employee's receipt of a gift does not present a 
genuine risk of a conflict of interest and may in fact 
advance the public interest. The Commission has created 
exemptions permitting giving and receiving gifts in these 
situations. One commonly used exemption permits 
municipal employees to accept payment of travel-related 
expenses when doing so advances a public purpose. 
Another commonly used exemption permits municipal 
employees to accept payment of costs involved in 
attendance at educational and training programs. Other 
exemptions are listed on the Commission's website. 
Example where there is no violation: A fire truck 
manufacturer offers to pay the travel expenses of a fire 
chief to a trade show where the chief can examine 
various kinds of fire-fighting equipment that the town 
may purchase. The chief fills out a disclosure form and 
obtains prior approval from his appointing authority. 
Example where there is no violation: A town treasurer 
attends a two-day annual school featuring multiple 
substantive seminars on issues relevant to treasurers. The 
annual school is paid for in part by banks that do business 
with town treasurers. The treasurer is only required to 
make a disclosure if one of the sponsoring banks has 
official business before her in the six months before or 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 7 of 21 
 
after the annual school. 
c. Misuse of position. Using your official position to get 
something you are not entitled to, or to get someone 
else something they are not entitled to, is prohibited. 
Causing someone else to do these things is also 
prohibited. (See Sections 23(b)(2) and 26) 
A municipal employee may not use her official position to 
get something worth $50 or more that would not be 
properly available to other similarly situated individuals. 
Similarly, a municipal employee may not use her official 
position to get something worth $50 or more for 
someone else that would not be properly available to 
other similarly situated individuals. Causing someone else 
to do these things is also prohibited. 
Example of violation: A full-time town employee writes a 
novel on work time, using her office computer, and 
directing her secretary to proofread the draft. 
Example of violation: A city councilor directs 
subordinates to drive the councilor's wife to and from the 
grocery store. 
Example of violation: A mayor avoids a speeding ticket by 
asking the police officer who stops him, "Do you know 
who I am?" and showing his municipal I.D. 
d. Self-dealing and nepotism. Participating as a municipal 
employee in a matter in which you, your immediate 
family, your business organization, or your future 
employer has a financial interest is prohibited. (See 
Section 19) 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 8 of 21 
 
A municipal employee may not participate in any 
particular matter in which he or a member of his 
immediate family (parents, children, siblings, spouse, and 
spouse's parents, children, and siblings) has a financial 
interest. He also may not participate in any particular 
matter in which a prospective employer, or a business 
organization of which he is a director, officer, trustee, or 
employee has a financial interest. Participation includes 
discussing as well as voting on a matter and delegating a 
matter to someone else. 
A financial interest may create a conflict of interest 
whether it is large or small, and positive or negative. In 
other words, it does not matter if a lot of money is 
involved or only a little. It also does not matter if you are 
putting money into your pocket or taking it out. If you, 
your immediate family, your business, or your employer 
have or has a financial interest in a matter, you may not 
participate. The financial interest must be direct and 
immediate or reasonably foreseeable to create a conflict. 
Financial interests which are remote, speculative, or not 
sufficiently identifiable do not create conflicts. 
Example of violation: A school committee member's wife 
is a teacher in the town's public schools. The school 
committee member votes on the budget line item for 
teachers' salaries. 
Example of violation: A member of a town affordable 
housing committee is also the director of a non-profit 
housing development corporation. The non-profit makes 
an application to the committee, and the 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 9 of 21 
 
member/director participates in the discussion. 
Example: A planning board member lives next door to 
property where a developer plans to construct a new 
building. Because the planning board member owns 
abutting property, he is presumed to have a financial 
interest in the matter. He cannot participate unless he 
provides the State Ethics Commission with an opinion 
from a qualified independent appraiser that the new 
construction will not affect his financial interest. 
In many cases, where not otherwise required to 
participate, a municipal employee may comply with the 
law by simply not participating in the particular matter in 
which she has a financial interest. She need not give a 
reason for not participating.  
There are several exemptions to this section of the law. An 
appointed municipal employee may file a written 
disclosure about the financial interest with his appointing 
authority and seek permission to participate 
notwithstanding the conflict. The appointing authority 
may grant written permission if she determines that the 
financial interest in question is not so substantial that it is 
likely to affect the integrity of his services to the 
municipality. Participating without disclosing the 
financial interest is a violation. Elected employees cannot 
use the disclosure procedure because they have no 
appointing authority. 
Example where there is no violation: An appointed 
member of the town zoning advisory committee, which 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 10 of 21 
 
will review and recommend changes to the town's by-
laws with regard to a commercial district, is a partner at a 
company that owns commercial property in the district. 
Prior to participating in any committee discussions, the 
member files a disclosure with the zoning board of 
appeals that appointed him to his position, and that 
board gives him a written determination authorizing his 
participation, despite his company's financial interest. 
There is no violation. 
There is also an exemption for both appointed and 
elected employees where the employee's task is to 
address a matter of general policy and the employee's 
financial interest is shared with a substantial portion 
(generally 10% or more) of the town's population, such as, 
for instance, a financial interest in real estate tax rates or 
municipal utility rates. 
Regulatory exemptions.  In addition to the statutory 
exemptions just mentioned, the Commission has created 
several regulatory exemptions permitting municipal 
employees to participate in particular matters 
notwithstanding the presence of a financial interest in 
certain very specific situations when permitting them to 
do so advances a public purpose.  There is an exemption 
permitting school committee members to participate in 
setting school fees that will affect their own children if 
they make a prior written disclosure.  There is an 
exemption permitting town clerks to perform election-
related functions even when they, or their immediate 
family members, are on the ballot, because clerks’ 
election-related functions are extensively regulated by 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 11 of 21 
 
other laws. There is also an exemption permitting a 
person serving as a member of a municipal board 
pursuant to a legal requirement that the board have 
members with a specified affiliation to participate fully in 
determinations of general policy by the board, even if the 
entity with which he is affiliated has a financial interest in 
the matter.  Other exemptions are listed in the 
Commission's regulations, available on the Commission’s 
website. 
Example where there is no violation:  A municipal 
Shellfish Advisory Board has been created to provide 
advice to the Board of Selectmen on policy issues related 
to shellfishing.  The Advisory Board is required to have 
members who are currently commercial fishermen.  A 
board member who is a commercial fisherman may 
participate in determinations of general policy in which 
he has a financial interest common to all commercial 
fishermen but may not participate in determinations in 
which he alone has a financial interest, such as the 
extension of his own individual permits or leases. 
e. False claims. Presenting a false claim to your employer 
for a payment or benefit is prohibited, and causing 
someone else to do so is also prohibited. (See Sections 
23(b)(4) and 26) 
A municipal employee may not present a false or 
fraudulent claim to his employer for any payment or 
benefit worth $50 or more or cause another person to do 
so. 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 12 of 21 
 
Example of violation: A public works director directs his 
secretary to fill out time sheets to show him as present at 
work on days when he was skiing. 
f. Appearance of conflict. Acting in a manner that would 
make a reasonable person think you can be improperly 
influenced is prohibited. (See Section 23(b)(3)) 
A municipal employee may not act in a manner that 
would cause a reasonable person to think that she would 
show favor toward someone or that she can be 
improperly influenced. Section 23(b)(3) requires a 
municipal employee to consider whether her 
relationships and affiliations could prevent her from 
acting fairly and objectively when she performs her duties 
for a city or town. If she cannot be fair and objective 
because of a relationship or affiliation, she should not 
perform her duties. However, a municipal employee, 
whether elected or appointed, can avoid violating this 
provision by making a public disclosure of the facts. An 
appointed employee must make the disclosure in writing 
to his appointing official. 
Example where there is no violation: A developer who is 
the cousin of the chair of the conservation commission 
has filed an application with the commission. A 
reasonable person could conclude that the chair might 
favor her cousin. The chair files a written disclosure with 
her appointing authority explaining her relationship with 
her cousin prior to the meeting at which the application 
will be considered. There is no violation of Sec. 23(b)(3). 
g. Confidential information. Improperly disclosing or 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 13 of 21 
 
personally using confidential information obtained 
through your job is prohibited. (See Section 23(c)) 
Municipal employees may not improperly disclose 
confidential information, or make personal use of non-
public information they acquired in the course of their 
official duties to further their personal interests. 
3. After-hours restrictions. 
a. Taking a second paid job that conflicts with the duties of 
your municipal job is prohibited. (See Section 23(b)(1)) 
A municipal employee may not accept other paid 
employment if the responsibilities of the second job are 
incompatible with his or her municipal job. 
Example: A police officer may not work as a paid private 
security guard in the town where he serves because the 
demands of his private employment would conflict with 
his duties as a police officer. 
Divided loyalties. Receiving pay from anyone other than 
the city or town to work on a matter involving the city or 
town is prohibited. Acting as agent or attorney for anyone 
other than the city or town in a matter involving the city 
or town is also prohibited whether or not you are paid. 
(See Sec. 17) 
Because cities and towns are entitled to the undivided 
loyalty of their employees, a municipal employee may not 
be paid by other people and organizations in relation to a 
matter if the city or town has an interest in the matter. In 
addition, a municipal employee may not act on behalf of 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 14 of 21 
 
other people and organizations or act as an attorney for 
other people and organizations in which the town has an 
interest. Acting as agent includes contacting the 
municipality in person, by phone, or in writing; acting as a 
liaison; providing documents to the city or town; and 
serving as spokesman. 
A municipal employee may always represent his own 
personal interests, even before his own municipal agency 
or board, on the same terms and conditions that other 
similarly situated members of the public would be 
allowed to do so. A municipal employee may also apply 
for building and related permits on behalf of someone 
else and be paid for doing so, unless he works for the 
permitting agency, or an agency which regulates the 
permitting agency. 
Example of violation: A full-time health agent submits a 
septic system plan that she has prepared for a private 
client to the town's board of health. 
Example of violation: A planning board member 
represents a private client before the board of selectmen 
on a request that town meeting consider rezoning the 
client's property. 
While many municipal employees earn their livelihood in 
municipal jobs, some municipal employees volunteer 
their time to provide services to the town or receive small 
stipends. Others, such as a private attorney who provides 
legal services to a town as needed, may serve in a position 
in which they may have other personal or private 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 15 of 21 
 
employment during normal working hours. In recognition 
of the need not to unduly restrict the ability of town 
volunteers and part-time employees to earn a living, the 
law is less restrictive for "special" municipal employees 
than for other municipal employees. 
The status of "special" municipal employee has to be 
assigned to a municipal position by vote of the board of 
selectmen, city council, or similar body. A position is 
eligible to be designated as "special" if it is unpaid, or if it 
is part-time and the employee is allowed to have another 
job during normal working hours, or if the employee was 
not paid for working more than 800 hours during the 
preceding 365 days. It is the position that is designated as 
"special" and not the person or persons holding the 
position. Selectmen in towns of 10,000 or fewer are 
automatically "special"; selectman in larger towns cannot 
be "specials." 
If a municipal position has been designated as "special," 
an employee holding that position may be paid by others, 
act on behalf of others, and act as attorney for others with 
respect to matters before municipal boards other than his 
own, provided that he has not officially participated in the 
matter, and the matter is not now, and has not within the 
past year been, under his official responsibility. 
Example: A school committee member who has been 
designated as a special municipal employee appears 
before the board of health on behalf of a client of his 
private law practice, on a matter that he has not 
participated in or had responsibility for as a school 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 16 of 21 
 
committee member. There is no conflict. However, he 
may not appear before the school committee, or the 
school department, on behalf of a client because he has 
official responsibility for any matter that comes before the 
school committee. This is still the case even if he has 
recused himself from participating in the matter in his 
official capacity. 
Example: A member who sits as an alternate on the 
conservation commission is a special municipal 
employee. Under town by-laws, he only has official 
responsibility for matters assigned to him. He may 
represent a resident who wants to file an application with 
the conservation commission as long as the matter is not 
assigned to him and he will not participate in it. 
b. Inside track. Being paid by your city or town, directly or 
indirectly, under some second arrangement in addition 
to your job is prohibited, unless an exemption applies. 
(See Section 20) 
A municipal employee generally may not have a financial 
interest in a municipal contract, including a second 
municipal job. A municipal employee is also generally 
prohibited from having an indirect financial interest in a 
contract that the city or town has with someone else. This 
provision is intended to prevent municipal employees 
from having an "inside track" to further financial 
opportunities. 
Example of violation: Legal counsel to the town housing 
authority becomes the acting executive director of the 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 17 of 21 
 
authority, and is paid in both positions. 
Example of violation: A selectman buys a surplus truck 
from the town DPW. 
Example of violation: A full-time secretary for the board 
of health wants to have a second paid job working part-
time for the town library. She will violate Section 20 unless 
she can meet the requirements of an exemption. 
Example of violation: A city councilor wants to work for a 
non-profit that receives funding under a contract with her 
city. Unless she can satisfy the requirements of an 
exemption under Section 20, she cannot take the job. 
There are numerous exemptions. A municipal employee 
may hold multiple unpaid or elected positions. Some 
exemptions apply only to special municipal employees. 
Specific exemptions may cover serving as an unpaid 
volunteer in a second town position, housing-related 
benefits, public safety positions, certain elected positions, 
small towns, and other specific situations. Please call the 
Ethics Commission's Legal Division for advice about a 
specific situation. 
4. After you leave municipal employment. (See Section 18) 
a. Forever ban. After you leave your municipal job, you may 
never work for anyone other than the municipality on a 
matter that you worked on as a municipal employee. 
If you participated in a matter as a municipal employee, 
you cannot ever be paid to work on that same matter for 
anyone other than the municipality, nor may you act for 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 18 of 21 
 
someone else, whether paid or not. The purpose of this 
restriction is to bar former employees from selling to 
private interests their familiarity with the facts of 
particular matters that are of continuing concern to their 
former municipal employer. The restriction does not 
prohibit former municipal employees from using the 
expertise acquired in government service in their 
subsequent private activities. 
Example of violation: A former school department 
employee works for a contractor under a contract that 
she helped to draft and oversee for the school 
department. 
b. One year cooling-off period. For one year after you leave 
your municipal job you may not participate in any matter 
over which you had official responsibility during your last 
two years of public service. 
Former municipal employees are barred for one year after 
they leave municipal employment from personally 
appearing before any agency of the municipality in 
connection with matters that were under their authority 
in their prior municipal positions during the two years 
before they left. 
Example: An assistant town manager negotiates a three-
year contract with a company. The town manager who 
supervised the assistant and had official responsibility for 
the contract, but did not participate in negotiating it, 
leaves her job to work for the company to which the 
contract was awarded. The former manager may not call 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 19 of 21 
 
or write the town in connection with the company's work 
on the contract for one year after leaving the town. 
A former municipal employee who participated as such in 
general legislation on expanded gaming and related 
matters may not become an officer or employee of, or 
acquire a financial interest in, an applicant for a gaming 
license, or a gaming licensee, for one year after his public 
employment ceases. 
c. Partners. Your partners will be subject to restrictions 
while you serve as a municipal employee and after your 
municipal service ends. 
Partners of municipal employees and former municipal 
employees are also subject to restrictions under the 
conflict of interest law. If a municipal employee 
participated in a matter, or if he has official responsibility 
for a matter, then his partner may not act on behalf of 
anyone other than the municipality or provide services as 
an attorney to anyone but the city or town in relation to 
the matter. 
Example: While serving on a city's historic district 
commission, an architect reviewed an application to get 
landmark status for a building. His partners at his 
architecture firm may not prepare and sign plans for the 
owner of the building or otherwise act on the owner's 
behalf in relation to the application for landmark status. 
In addition, because the architect has official 
responsibility as a commissioner for every matter that 
comes before the commission, his partners may not 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 20 of 21 
 
communicate with the commission or otherwise act on 
behalf of any client on any matter that comes before the 
commission during the time that the architect serves on 
the commission. 
Example: A former town counsel joins a law firm as a 
partner. Because she litigated a lawsuit for the town, her 
new partners cannot represent any private clients in the 
lawsuit for one year after her job with the town ended. 
 
 
This summary is not intended to be legal advice and, because it is 
a summary, it does not mention every provision of the conflict 
law that may apply in a particular situation. Our website, 
http://www.mass.gov/ethics contains further information about 
how the law applies in many situations. You can also contact the 
Commission's Legal Division via our website, by telephone, or by 
letter. Our contact information is at the top of this document. 
 
Version 7:  Revised May 20, 2022  
 
 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 21 of 21 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF RECEIPT OF SUMMARY OF THE 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST LAW FOR MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES 
I, (print your first and last name): 
 _________________________________________________________________ , 
an employee at (name of your municipal agency or department):  
 _________________________________________________________________ , 
 
hereby acknowledge that I received a copy of the summary of 
the Conflict Of Interest Law for municipal employees, revised May 
20, 2022.  
 
Signature_____________________________________Date ______________  
Municipal employees should complete the acknowledgment of 
receipt and return it to the individual who provided them with a 
copy of the summary. Alternatively, municipal employees may 
send an email acknowledging receipt of the summary to the 
individual who provided them with a copy of it. 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-08 
Version 01 
 
ADHERENCE TO COURT ORDERS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The purpose of this memorandum is to remind Boston Public 
Schools staff of the need to continue to adhere to the court 
orders entered against the District by courts of federal, state, and 
local jurisdiction.  Such orders have the force of law and are 
binding on the District.  Therefore, it is the responsibility of 
administrators and staff of the Boston Public Schools to comply 
with the terms of such orders. 
Additionally, an order by an arbitrator or state agency may also 
require compliance. Heads of school, principals, and other 
administrators may contact the Office of Legal Advisor with 
questions regarding adherence to court orders or the provisions 
of any order. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular #LGL-08, 2019-2020 
[Date] 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-21 
Version 01 
 
POLICY ON USE OF BPS BUILDINGS & FACILITIES FOR 
POLITICAL PURPOSES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
All building administrators and managers of facilities within the 
Boston Public School Department should be aware of the Boston 
Public Schools’ policy on the use of its facilities for political 
purposes.  
No Boston Public School facility may be used for predominantly 
political activity, such as activities in support of political 
candidates or ballot questions.  
Any use of a Boston Public School facility for a predominantly 
governmental activity with an incidental political activity overlap, 
such as those activities related to education laws, funding, or 
policies, but not related to specific teaching or learning at a 
particular school, may only occur with prior notification to and 
specific approval from the superintendent or their designee. 
Examples of such activities might include the signing of 
education legislation, the announcement of educational policies 
or results, or announcements of receipt of grants or other funds. 
These examples demonstrate activities in furtherance of the 
purpose for which governmental funds have been appropriated 
to Boston Public Schools, with an incidental political activity 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LG-21 
Page 2 of 2 
 
associated therewith. Any use of a Boston public school or facility 
for political activity without obtaining the prior approval of the 
superintendent or their designee is an unauthorized use and 
should be considered an “unwarranted privilege” for the 
purposes of the Massachusetts Conflict of Interest Law. 
For additional information, regarding political activities generally, 
please see Superintendent’s Circular LGL-09 Political Activity by 
Public Employees. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-10 
Version 01 
 
MILITARY RECRUITERS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
The purpose of this circular is to provide clarification on the law 
requiring the release of student information and access to 
students at the high school level by military recruiters. 
Federal legislation requires that a local educational agency (LEA) 
which receives federal funds release the names, addresses, and 
telephone listings of secondary students (grade 9 and above) to 
military recruiters and institutions of higher education.  The Every 
Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) contains similar language 
concerning this obligation. 
The release of student names, addresses, and telephone listings 
to military recruiters and institutions of higher education requires 
that LEAs provide parents and guardians with prior notification.  
Such notification is provided by the Boston Public Schools in the 
Guide to the Boston Public Schools for Students and Families 
(“Policy Handbook”).  As noted, a parent/guardian may request 
that this information not be released without giving the 
parent/guardian prior notification.  Accordingly, copies of all such 
requests by parents/guardians should be in writing and should 
be on file in the school’s office.  A copy of these signed requests 
or a master list of these student names and student numbers 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-10 
Page 2 of 3 
 
must be forwarded by October 15 by the head of school to the 
Office of Data & Accountability. 
If military recruiters contact a high school requesting a master 
list of student names and addresses, the recruiter should be 
asked to make the request directly to the Office of Data & 
Accountability. 
A second provision of the law authorizes direct access to high 
school students by military recruiters. Usually, this access is in the 
form of a request to make space available in the school for a 
military recruiter to distribute literature and to speak with or 
address interested students. The act requires that recruiters be 
given the same access to your students as you provide generally 
to post-secondary educational institutions or to prospective 
employers. Please review your practices to assure that 
henceforth all three (i.e., business, higher education, and military 
recruiters) have the same access. 
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
By October 15 
Heads of school forward to the Office of Data & 
Accountability the list of students whose 
names should not be given to military 
recruiters.  
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-10 
Page 3 of 3 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-22 
Version 01 
 
SEXUAL OFFENDER REGISTRY INFORMATION (S.O.R.I.) 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
The Sexual Offender Registry Law requires that all convicted 
sexual offenders in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts register 
with the police departments in the cities or towns where they live 
and work. The State classifies the offender on a level of 1 to 3, 
depending on the likelihood of whether the offender might 
repeat his/her crimes. Once a local police department receives 
the information, it can be shared with public school districts for 
the protection of children. As a result of this law, Boston Public 
Schools principals and heads of school can access SORI 
information per the state website as described below.  
The Boston Public Schools will receive the Sexual Offender 
Registry Information (S.O.R.I.) from the Boston Police 
Department. Pursuant to state regulations, BPD must notify all 
schools in the community of a finally classified Level 3 sex 
offender or a sexually dangerous predator. Information available 
includes: the registered individual’s name, home and/or 
workplace address, date of birth, general physical description, 
charges for which they were convicted, and a photograph, if 
available.  
Information pertaining to the Sex Offender Registry website 
should be shared with your staff to educate them on this 
resource and of the public availability of S.O.R.I information. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-22 
Page 2 of 6 
 
Although S.O.R.I. information is distributed to alert communities 
and protect children, it must be handled in a responsible manner. 
It is against the law to distribute copies and/or use this 
information in an unlawful manner, e.g., threats, extortion, etc. It 
is also against the law to use the sex offender registry 
information to commit a crime or to engage in illegal 
discrimination or harassment of a sex offender.  
The law was passed to prevent convicted offenders from preying 
on innocent children. If you identify a registered offender acting 
inappropriately around a school building or approaching 
children, contact the Boston Police Department immediately.  
Attached, please find some common questions and answers.   
1. Who must register as a sex offender?  
A sex offender is anyone who lives, works, or attends school 
in Massachusetts who has:  
• Been convicted of a sex offense  
• Been adjudicated as a youthful offender or a delinquent 
juvenile for a sex offense  
• Been released from incarceration, parole, probation 
supervision, or custody with the Department of Youth 
Services for a sex offense conviction or adjudication  
• Been adjudicated as a sexually dangerous person, or a 
person released from civil commitment anytime from 
August 1, 1981 
2. How can a principal or head of school request information 
from the Sex Offender Registry Board?  
Once a person registers with the Sex Offender Registry 
Board and that information is shared with local police 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-22 
Page 3 of 6 
 
departments, those departments can share the information 
with public school districts. Local police departments have 
access to information pertaining to Levels 1, 2, and 3 sex 
offenders.  
3. How can non-school personnel or parents request 
information from the Sex Offender Registry Board?  
The public may request information about sex offenders in 
the community by sending a Sex Offender Inquiry Form 
request to the Sex Offender Registry Board. Requests may 
either be submitted online or at the following mail address:  
Attn: SORI Coordinator 
Sex Offender Registry Board 
P.O. Box 392 
North Billerica, MA 01862 
 
Please see https://www.mass.gov/how-to/request-sex-
offender-registry-information-sori for more information. 
A person may also request information in person at a local 
police station.  
Unlike local police departments, members of the public can 
only access information about Level 2 and Level 3 offenders. 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-22 
Page 4 of 6 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
OR 
Owner: 
Chief of Safety Services 
Department: 
Safety Services 
Mailing Address: 
213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, MA  02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000 
Fax: 
617-635-8006 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-22 
Page 5 of 6 
 
SEX OFFENDER REGISTRY INFORMATION (S.O.R.I) 
Questions and Answers 
• What should I as a principal/head of school do with the 
information I receive from Safety Services or BPD on S.O.R.I. 
cases? 
You should establish a secure, central file for mandatory review 
by all staff members, including teachers, paraprofessionals and 
volunteers who have an established pattern of work in the 
school. This file will be a one-copy file, with opportunity for 
staff to come and review. No copies of this S.O.R.I. information 
can be made and/or distributed. 
• What if upon first review, I note that one of the offenders is an 
employee/volunteer at my school? 
Contact the Office of Human Capital for further direction. The 
Office of Human Capital will review each situation on a case-
by-case basis and will work with the Office of Legal Advisor 
and the superintendent of schools on a final resolution. 
• What if upon first review, I note that one of the offenders is a 
student in my school? 
Contact Safety Services Unit at 617-635-8000 for further 
direction. 
• What should I do if a parent or community member comes to 
the school or calls seeking S.O.R.I. information? 
The individual should be directed to the nearest police district, 
which will provide the information upon request. 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-22 
Page 6 of 6 
 
• How will S.O.R.I. be handled relative to BPS employees, BPS 
students, BPS volunteers, and bus drivers? 
o All employees hired henceforth will have a S.O.R.I. check 
done automatically. This will be in conjunction with the 
C.O.R.I. (Criminal Offender Registry Information) check that 
is already in place. Also, all information regarding S.O.R.I. 
offenders received by Safety Services will be run against the 
current employee listing to identify any employees who 
might be sex offenders. 
o All information regarding S.O.R.I. offenders received by 
Safety Services will be run against the current student 
listing to identify any students who might be sex offenders. 
o Partners in Education will request to be placed on the 
Police Department’s mailing list on all S.O.R.I. cases and will 
check this on a regular basis against their listing of 
volunteers. 
o BPS’s contracted transportation provider will request to be 
placed on the Police Department’s mailing list on all S.O.R.I. 
cases and will check this on a regular basis against their 
listing of bus drivers. 
o Community Schools will request to be placed on the Police 
Department’s mailing list on all S.O.R.I. cases and will check 
this on a regular basis against their listing of employees. 
• What if any situation, in general, occurs in or around my 
school relative to the S.O.R.I. process? 
Contact Safety Services Unit immediately at 617-635-8000. 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-16 
Version 01 
 
STUDENT HEALTH INFORMATION 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
State and federal laws and regulations dealing with the 
confidentiality of student record information recognize that 
student health information is treated differently from other 
student record information. It should be noted that the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, also known as 
HIPAA, does not apply to student records, with some exceptions 
not germane to this policy. See 65 Fed. Reg. 82805 (2000).  
School health personnel may have access to student health 
records when such access is required in the performance of their 
official duties. See 603 Code Mass. Regs. §23.07 (4)(h). Of course, a 
parent/guardian, or in some circumstances the student, may 
consent to the release of student health record information to 
school personnel generally. In the absence of such informed 
written consent, however, the following standards should apply 
to a determination of which school officials may access what 
parts of a student’s health record. In the first instance, such 
determinations should be made by the building administrator in 
consultation with the school-based nurse. If a disagreement 
arises, such concerns should be brought to the attention of the 
senior director of Health Services for resolution. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-16 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
The following guidelines should be used: 
1. Routine medical information. Such student health information 
should be disseminated only as is appropriate to meet the 
regular and effective educational mission of the school. Such 
information may include information contained in an IEP or 
504 Plan, previously scheduled medical appointments, health-
related incidents that may require or necessitate further 
reporting, dispensation of medications, and conditions such as 
food allergies, seizures, and asthma. In all events, only the 
minimum necessary health record information should be 
disclosed. Thus, the type of medications dispensed would, 
absent more, not be disclosed in the above example. The fact 
that a medical appointment necessitating early dismissal is 
with a psychiatrist would also not normally be disclosed as a 
matter of routine medical information. 
Routine medical information is information that is appropriate 
for certain staff to know in order to maximize the safety for 
children. For example, a child with diabetes needs to have 
teachers who are knowledgeable about the illness so the child 
may have a safe learning environment. Low blood sugar can 
also affect the child’s ability to concentrate. In this 
circumstance it would be appropriate to notify all the child’s 
teachers individually. Health information should never be 
circulated by an all-staff memo. 
2. 
Medical information of limited dissemination. This is student 
health information that is of a confidential nature and yet is of 
little educational benefit in the school. This is specific 
information that the Student Support Team needs to know to 
provide accommodations. When possible, all diagnoses, 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-16 
Page 3 of 4 
 
especially those related to mental health, should be 
expressed as a functional diagnosis. For example, it should be 
enough for the team to know that a child who is depressed is 
getting counseling. The details of the diagnosis or the causes 
of the depression are not relevant to the team’s provision of 
accommodations. The nurse provides the connection with 
the provider to interpret the medical information or when 
clarification is required. 
3. 
Highly sensitive information. This is student health 
information of a highly sensitive nature that has no bearing 
on educational achievement and is of no educational use or 
consequence and in which a high expectation of privacy 
exists for students and/or parents or guardians. Such 
information may include: suicide attempts, treatment for 
drug or alcohol abuse, mental health diagnoses, family 
planning information, maternity/paternity tests or 
information, abortions, or HIV infection. This information is of 
two types: (1) no accommodations or safety issues and (2) 
highly sensitive information.  
Medical diagnoses that have no relevance to a student’s 
performance do not need to be shared. For example, a child 
in therapy who is depressed but not suicidal and who is 
performing well in school, does not need to have this 
information shared with the school community. There are 
also highly sensitive medical situations that are protected by 
state regulations. These include HIV and a minor’s right to 
seek medical care for pregnancy, sexually transmitted 
diseases, and substance abuse, without their parents’ 
consent. Any inclusion of this information in the educational 
record is a violation of the adolescent’s right to privacy. With 
HIV, the student/family can choose to disclose and can limit 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-16 
Page 4 of 4 
 
the individuals to disclose to. In some circumstances, such 
information is of such a private nature that even 
dissemination to a parent or guardian is prohibited.  
Questions in this regard should be directed to the Office of 
Legal Advisor. Such highly sensitive health information 
should, whenever possible, be segregated from the rest of a 
student’s health information to reduce the chance of 
inadvertent disclosure.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-18 
Version 01 
 
DISPLAY OF FLAG AND SCHOOL CEREMONIES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Massachusetts General Law requires that a “flag shall be 
displayed, weather permitting, on the school building or grounds 
on every school day and on every legal holiday.”  In addition, we 
are required to ensure that “a flag shall be displayed in every 
classroom...and in each assembly hall” (M.G.L. c.71, §69). The 
important patriotic and historic holidays celebrated during the 
school year place a focus on our responsibility with respect to the 
display of the American flag in all schools and classrooms. 
Patriotic and national holidays offer the opportunity in our history 
and social studies classes to provide instruction about the flag, its 
origin, care, and symbolic significance. This instruction complies 
with State Learning Standard 18 (Principles of American 
Government). In addition, student projects may afford the 
opportunity for students to conduct in-depth research on 
subjects such as the flag and other patriotic symbols, documents, 
speeches, and literature. 
School Committee policy and Massachusetts state law require 
that “public school teachers at the commencement of the 1st 
class of the day lead the class in group recitation of the Pledge of 
Allegiance” (M.G.L. c.71, §69). The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-18 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Court, however, has ruled that although students and teachers 
have the right to a daily opportunity to participate in the Pledge 
of Allegiance, teachers and students have a constitutional right 
not to participate in the pledge. Teachers and students who 
choose not to participate (i.e., recite and/or stand) may not be 
penalized for declining to do so. All schools must comply with our 
responsibility to display the flag and to provide daily opportunity 
for recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-06 
Version 01 
 
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or suspended 
by a subsequent version. 
 
It is the policy of the Boston Public Schools to make reasonable 
efforts to accommodate the religious beliefs of students and 
staff.  State and federal laws also mandate such reasonable 
accommodations. 
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 151C, Section 2B reads, in 
pertinent part, as follows: 
“Any student in an educational or vocational training 
institution, other than a religious or denominational 
educational or vocational training institution, who is unable, 
because of [their] religious beliefs, to attend classes or to 
participate in any examination, study, or work requirement 
on a particular day shall be excused from any such 
examination or study or work requirement, and shall be 
provided with an opportunity to make up such examination, 
study, or work requirement which [they] may have missed 
because of such absence on any particular day; provided, 
however, that such makeup examination or work shall not 
create an unreasonable burden upon such school. No fees of 
any kind shall be charged by the institution for making 
available to the said student such opportunity. No adverse 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-06, 2023-2024 
September 1, 2023 
Page 2 of 2 
 
or prejudicial effects shall result to any student because of 
[their] availing [themselves] of the provisions of this section.” 
To accommodate the religious beliefs of students, all who 
observe any holiday because of religious beliefs should be 
marked “constructively present” upon submitting a valid note 
from a parent or guardian (see Circular ACA-18).  In addition, 
teachers should refrain from giving tests on these religious 
holidays and allow sufficient time for these students to make up 
their work before administering tests. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Lisa Maki 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
lmaki@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-07 
Version 01 
 
PRIVACY OF STUDENT INFORMATION AND STUDENT 
RECORD PROCEDURES: HOW TO RESPOND TO 
STUDENT RECORD REQUESTS IN COMPLIANCE WITH 
FERPA AND STATE LAW 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
I. 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
These student record procedures pertain to all information 
maintained by the Boston Public Schools concerning a student in 
which he/she may be individually identified.  
The student record consists of two parts: the transcript and the 
temporary record. 
A. 
The transcript contains administrative records that 
constitute the minimum data necessary to reflect the 
student's educational progress and to operate the 
educational system. The transcript is limited to the 
name, address, and phone number of the student, the 
student’s birth date, name, address and phone number 
of the custodial parent or guardian, course titles, 
grades (or the equivalent when grades are not 
applicable), course credit, grade level completed, and 
the year completed. The transcript must be retained for 
at least sixty (60) years after the student leaves the 
school system. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 2 of 21 
 
B. 
The temporary record is all other student record 
information besides the transcript.  Temporary record 
information may include health information, 
disciplinary information, examples of student work, 
special education or 504 plan documents, incident 
reports, and any other information kept by the school 
which identifies the student individually. Duplicates of 
an original record do not need to be kept as part of the 
temporary record. The temporary record should be 
destroyed no later than seven (7) years after the 
student leaves the school system, provided proper 
notification is given as directed below. 
II. 
PARENTS (AND STUDENTS) HAVE A LEGAL RIGHT TO 
CONTROL ACCESS TO STUDENT INFORMATION 
Both federal and state law provide that a parent, and any student 
that is 14 or older and/or in grade nine or above, have a legal right 
to control access to the student’s educational record. The Family 
Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) and Massachusetts 
law define the parent’s/student’s right to access, seek to amend 
and exercise control over the disclosure of personally identifiable 
information in the student record. The Boston Public Schools is 
legally responsible to respect and protect the parent’s/student’s 
rights to privacy and control under FERPA and state law. 
Violation of these legal rights can subject BPS to sanctions, 
including termination of federal funding, and can subject BPS 
employees to discipline, up to and including termination. 
BPS notifies all students and parents of these rights annually by 
means of the “Guide to BPS for Students & Families.” The Guide 
for Students & Families identifies the limited types of information 
that may be released without consent (see Directory Information 
below). By September 30 of each year, parents and students have 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 3 of 21 
 
a right to inform the school that such information shall not be 
released without direct consent. 
Schools receive requests for student record information in many 
ways and from many different sources.  By law, a school’s 
response to a request for student records must vary depending 
on who is making the request and what is being requested. 
Below are descriptions of the main categories of requests that 
schools may need to address. If the information below does not 
directly describe a situation presented, the school should contact 
the Office of Legal Advisor at legal@bostonpublicschools.org for 
more direction.  
III. 
REQUESTS AND CONSENT BY PARENT/STUDENT  
When a parent or student seeks to access, amend or consent to 
sharing of student records, the following definitions will aid you 
in understanding and complying with applicable law. 
• A parent is the student’s natural parent, a guardian, or an 
individual acting as a parent in the absence of a parent or 
guardian. 
• A custodial parent is any parent with whom a child 
resides, whether permanently or for periods of time, and 
who supervises the child. 
• A non-custodial parent is any parent who does not have 
physical custody of the child and who does not reside 
with or supervise the child, even for short periods of time, 
by court order.  
• An eligible student is a student who is at least 14 years of 
age and/or has entered the ninth grade. 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 4 of 21 
 
A. Request to Inspect/Copy Records 
1. Custodial Parents and Eligible Student. A custodial 
parent, and/or an eligible student have a right to 
inspect all portions of the student record upon 
request.  The record will be made available to the 
custodial parent and/or eligible student no later 
than ten (10) days after the request.  The custodial 
parent and/or eligible student have the right to 
receive copies of any part of the record.  In addition, 
the custodial parent and/or eligible student may 
request to have parts of the record interpreted by a 
qualified professional of the school or may invite 
anyone else of their choosing to inspect or interpret 
the record with them.  Please see Attachment 1 for 
the process of fulfilling a custodial parent’s or 
eligible student’s request for the student record. 
2. Non-Custodial Parents. Non-custodial parents must 
be given access to their children’s student records, 
unless the school has been given written 
documentation that establishes either:  
a. The non-custodial parent has been denied legal 
custody by a court based upon a threat to the 
student or to the custodial parent. 
b. The non-custodial parent has been denied 
visitation or has supervised visitation.  
c. Access to the student or to the custodial parent 
has been restricted by a court-issued protective 
order against the non-custodial parent, 
provided such protective order does not 
specifically allow access to student record 
information. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 5 of 21 
 
d. There is an order of a probate and family court 
judge which prohibits distribution of student 
records to the non-custodial parent.   
A school that receives a request for student record 
information from a non-custodial parent should send 
a copy of the notification attached as Attachment 2, 
via certified and first-class mail, to the custodial 
parent prior to providing student records to the non-
custodial parent.  The notification must be in English 
and the primary language of the custodial parent.  If 
no documentation related to any of the four (4) 
scenarios above is received within 21 days, the records 
must be provided to the non-custodial parent. If 
documentation related to any of the four (4) scenarios 
above is received within 21 days, it must be kept in the 
student record and the non-custodial parent must be 
notified, via certified and first class mail, of the reason 
for denial of access.  
B. Request to Amend Student Record 
The custodial parent and/or eligible student have the 
right to add relevant comments, information, or other 
written materials to the student record.  In addition, the 
custodial parent and/or eligible student have the right to 
make a written request that information in the record be 
amended or deleted, except information created by a 
special education team, which may not be amended or 
deleted until after acceptance of the individualized 
education plan or completion of the appeals process.  
The custodial parent and/or eligible student have a right 
to a conference with the school principal to make their 
objections known.  Within one week after the 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 6 of 21 
 
conference, the principal must render a decision in 
writing.  If the custodial parent and/or eligible student 
are not satisfied with the decision, it may be appealed to 
the operational leader. 
C. Consent to Share Student Information 
The custodial parent and/or eligible student have the 
legal right to consent to sharing of the student record 
with any person or entity they choose. A school should 
use Attachment 4 to document the custodial parent’s 
and/or eligible student’s specific, informed, written 
consent and include the signed consent in the student 
record. 
Except as specifically noted below, no individuals or 
organizations other than the custodial parent, eligible 
student, and authorized school personnel are allowed to 
have access to information in the student record without 
the specific, informed, written consent of the custodial 
parent or the eligible student.   
IV. 
THIRD PARTY REQUESTS FOR STUDENT-IDENTIFYING 
INFORMATION: CONSENT NOT REQUIRED OR ASSUMED BY 
OPERATION OF LAW 
A. 
Subpoenaed Records. Boston Public Schools will 
produce documents requested in court orders or 
lawfully issued subpoenas. Such requests should be 
emailed immediately to the Office of Legal Advisor.  All 
records sought by the court order or subpoena should 
be forwarded via courier mail or hand delivery as soon 
as possible.  Attachment 3 should be completed and 
used to notify the parent and/or eligible student that 
subpoenaed information will be provided absent 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 7 of 21 
 
further court order. 
B. 
Authorized School Personnel.  Authorized school 
personnel (those providing direct services to the 
student, administrative staff whose duties require 
them to access the student record, and an evaluation 
team that evaluates a student) shall have access to the 
student’s school record when such access is required in 
the performance of their official duties. 
C. 
Directory Information.  Unless the parent or eligible 
student has previously indicated in writing their 
disapproval of the release of such information, the 
school may release the following directory information: 
student’s name, age, grade level, and dates of 
enrollment.  BPS notifies students and parents 
annually of the types of information that will be 
released by means of the “Guide to BPS for Students & 
Families,” and allows custodial parents and students 
until September 30 of each year to inform BPS that 
such information will not be released without prior 
consent. 
D. 
Military Recruiters and Higher Education Institutions.  
Unless a parent or student has previously objected in 
writing in response to notification through the 
publication of the “Guide to BPS for Students & 
Families,” military recruiters and institutions of higher 
education must be provided, upon written request, 
with the names, addresses and telephone numbers of 
secondary school students. All requests by military 
recruiters for such information must be forwarded to 
the Office of Legal Advisor for centralized processing.  
E. 
Specified State Agencies and Local Authorities. A 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 8 of 21 
 
school may release student record information without 
prior written consent to the following agencies when 
acting in their official capacities: Department of 
Children and Families, Department of Youth Services, a 
probation officer, or a justice of the court.  Attachment 
3 should be used to notify parents of such requests. 
F. 
Schools. When a student seeks or intends to transfer to 
another school, the student record can be sent to the 
receiving school. 
G. 
School Nurses and State Health Department.  School 
nurses and local and state health department officials 
may have access to student health record information 
when such access is required in the performance of 
their official duties.  For further information related to 
student health information, please consult 
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-16, Student Health 
Information. 
H. 
Health or Safety Emergency.  Without the consent of 
the parent or eligible student, a school may disclose 
information regarding a student to appropriate parties 
in connection with a health or safety emergency if 
knowledge of the information is necessary to protect 
the health or safety of the student or individuals and if 
the appropriate procedure has been followed.  That 
does not mean that anyone who asks, and who thinks 
something is amiss or might happen, has a right to 
access personally identifiable student information.   
Required criteria: The regulations implementing 
FERPA (34 CFR § 99.36) requires that each of the 
following criteria be met: 
a. 
The request is made “in connection with an 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 9 of 21 
 
emergency.” 
i. “Emergency” means the request must be 
related to an actual, impending, or imminent 
emergency.  
ii. BPS requires that a school consider the 
following criteria to determine whether the 
request is made in connection with an 
emergency: 
• The seriousness of the threat to the health 
or safety of the student or others 
• The need for the information to meet the 
threat 
• Whether the requestor is able to deal with 
the emergency 
• The extent to which time is of the essence 
in dealing with the emergency. 
iii. Any release of records is limited to the period 
of the emergency; if the emergency is over no 
further release of student information is 
allowed. 
b. 
There is an articulable and significant threat to 
the health or safety of the student or other 
individuals. 
c. 
The requester (usually law enforcement, public 
health officials, and medical professionals) needs 
the information to protect the health or safety of 
the student or other individuals. 
d. 
No blanket release of personally identifiable 
information is allowed. Any release of 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 10 of 21 
 
information must be narrowly tailored 
considering the immediacy, magnitude, and 
specificity of the threat.   
e. 
The determination is made on a case-by-case 
basis, considering the totality of the 
circumstances pertaining to the threat to the 
health or safety of the student or others.   
f. 
Within a reasonable time after making the 
disclosure, the school must record in the 
student’s record the articulable and significant 
threat that formed the basis for the disclosure, 
and to whom the information was disclosed. 
V. 
THIRD PARTY REQUESTS FOR PUBLIC RECORDS 
CONTAINING ONLY REDACTED AND/OR NON-STUDENT-
IDENTIFYING INFORMATION 
Upon receipt of a third-party request for public records, the 
school should immediately send a copy of the request via 
email to the Office of Legal Advisor for review and direction.  
All public records requests must be reduced to writing, 
dated, and signed by the requestor, and must contain the 
return address information of the requestor. For more 
information, see Superintendent’s Circular LGL-3, Public 
Records Requests. 
VI. 
DESTRUCTION OF STUDENT RECORDS 
The law sets forth different time periods for the retention 
and destruction of different portions of student records.  
These different time periods are set forth below: 
A. Transcripts - A student’s transcript must be maintained 
by the school department for sixty (60) years following 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 11 of 21 
 
the student’s graduation, transfer, or withdrawal from 
the school system. 
B. Periodic Review of the Temporary Record - While a 
student is enrolled in a school, the principal/head of 
school or his/her designee shall periodically review all 
students’ temporary records and identify for destruction 
any misleading, outdated, or irrelevant information.  This 
may include, particularly, exemplars of student work or 
other impertinent information.  Prior to destroying any 
such information, however, the student and his/her 
parent must be given written notification of the school’s 
intent to destroy such information and must be given the 
opportunity to receive the information or a copy of the 
information prior to its destruction. 
C. Temporary Record Destruction - The temporary record 
of any student may be destroyed no later than seven (7) 
years after the student transfers, graduates or withdraws 
from the school district, if the student and his/her 
parent/guardian have been given written notification 
that includes the approximate date of destruction of the 
temporary record and indicating their right to receive the 
information in whole or in part at the time of the 
student’s graduation, transfer or withdrawal from the 
school system or prior to its destruction.  Such notice 
must be in addition to the annual notice issued by 
Boston Public Schools in the “Guide to BPS For Students 
& Families.” 
 
 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 12 of 21 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Office of Legal Advisor Director 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 13 of 21 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
STUDENT RECORD REQUEST PROCEDURES 
1. Parent/guardian or eligible student requests for the student’s 
record are received, processed, and sent to the requestor 
directly by the school. Third-party requests are received by the 
Office of Legal Advisor, processed by the school, and then sent 
back to the Office of Legal Advisor for transmission to the 
requester. 
2. The principal/head of school will be responsible for certifying 
that all portions of the student record have been copied as a 
response to the requestor. The principal/head of school will 
complete the checklist and certification. If the request is being 
sent to the parent, the certification will include the date sent to 
the parent. A copy of the checklist will be sent with the record, 
and the original will be retained by the school.  
3. For third party requests, the principal/head of school will 
complete the same process but provide the copy of the entire 
record and the checklist to the Office of Legal Advisor for 
review and delivery. 
4. Requests received during the summer months:  By June 1 of 
each year, principals must identify who to contact for each 
week of the summer break and provide that list to the school 
superintendent. The designated individual will check for 
incoming mail and for parent/guardian or eligible student 
requests, will obtain the records (copy and/or print), complete 
the checklist, and deliver them to the requester.  In the event 
of a third-party request, the same protocol will be followed but 
the designated individual will send the record and the 
completed checklist to the Office of Legal Advisor.   


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 14 of 21 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
NOTICE OF NON-CUSTODIAL PARENT REQUEST  
FOR STUDENT RECORDS 
VIA REGISTERED MAIL AND FIRST CLASS MAIL 
 
Dear Custodial Parent of  ________________________________________ : 
This is to notify you that a request from __________________________  
was received on_____________ for the following parts of your 
child’s student record: ___________________________________________. 
In accordance with federal and Massachusetts law, non-custodial 
parents must be given access to their children’s student records, 
unless the school has been given written documentation that 
establishes either:  
1. The non-custodial parent was denied legal custody by court 
order based upon a threat to the student or to the custodial 
parent; 
2. The non-custodial parent has been denied visitation or has 
supervised visitation;  
3. Access to the student or to the custodial parent has been 
restricted by a court-issued protective order against the non-
custodial parent, provided such protective order does not 
specifically allow access to student record information; or 
4. There is an order of a probate and family court judge which 
prohibits distribution of student records to the non-custodial 
parent.  
 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 15 of 21 
 
The requested records will be released on _______________, unless 
the documentation indicated in the paragraph above has been 
received by the Building Administrator of the School.  If you have 
any questions, you may contact 
 
_____________________________________ at  _________________________ . 
Sincerely, 
 
 __________________________________________________________________  
Signature of Principal or Other Authorized School Employee 
 
Date: _________________________ 
 
NOTE:  THIS NOTICE MUST BE SENT IN BOTH ENGLISH AND THE 
PRIMARY LANGUAGE OF THE CUSTODIAL PARENT.


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 16 of 21 
 
ATTACHMENT 3 
NOTICE OF DISSEMINATION OF STUDENT RECORD TO THIRD 
PARTIES FOR WHICH CONSENT IS NOT REQUIRED OR IS 
ASSUMED BY OPERATION OF LAW 
 
Dear ____________________________________________: 
This is to notify you that a: 
 subpoena 
 request from a justice 
 other (specify) _______________________________________________  
has been received for the following parts of your/your child's 
student record: 
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
The Massachusetts regulations pertaining to student records 
state that the school system must comply with the above 
request, but that this notification must be provided to you prior 
to the release of the records. In the case of a subpoena, court 
order, or request from a probation officer or the Department of 
Youth Services, you have the right to attempt to have the 
subpoena, order or request stopped by a court. 
 
 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 17 of 21 
 
The records will be released on  _________________________________ . 
If you have any questions, you may contact 
___________________________________ at ____________________________ . 
Sincerely yours, 
 __________________________________________________________________  
Signature of Principal or Other Authorized School Employee 
Date:_____________________________ 
 
NOTE:  This notice must be sent in both English and the primary 
language of the custodial parent. 
 
 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 18 of 21 
 
ATTACHMENT 4 
PARENT’S OR STUDENT’S CONSENT FOR DISSEMINATION OF 
STUDENT RECORD TO THIRD PARTY 
My name is _____________________________________________. I am: 
 the parent/guardian of a BPS student named: 
  _____________________________________________________________  
 a BPS student age 14 or over and in at least ninth grade. 
I give permission for the following third parties to                                           
 inspect 
 secure a copy of  
the parts of my/my child's student record noted below. 
THIRD PARTIES: 
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
REASONS FOR RELEASE OF RECORDS: 
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 
 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 19 of 21 
 
Parts of Record to be Released* 
Permission 
Granted 
Permission 
Denied 
Transcript information (includes 
identifying information, course titles, 
grades or their equivalent, and grade 
level completed) 
 
 
Disciplinary record 
 
 
Extracurricular activities 
 
 
Teacher and counselor evaluations 
and comments 
 
 
Attendance record 
 
 
Other (specify): 
   
 
 
 
 __________________________________________________________________  
**Signature of eligible student or parent/guardian 
Student's Class:_____________________________Date_________________  
*  Before seeking the parent's or eligible student's consent, the 
school should cross out those items which have not been 
requested by the third party. 
**  This form may be signed by a student or former student of 14 
years of age or older, or a student in the ninth grade or above, 
or a custodial parent or guardian. 
 
 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 20 of 21 
 
ATTACHMENT 5 
CHECKLIST FOR RETRIEVAL OF COMPLETE STUDENT RECORD 
 
YES N/A 
Print electronic student file from ASPEN,  
SNAP and EDPLAN 
▢ 
▢ 
 
Transcript information (includes identifying  
information, course titles, grades or equivalent, and  
grade level completed) 
▢ 
▢ 
Disciplinary record 
▢ 
▢ 
Nursing record 
▢ 
▢ 
  
Special education record 
▢ 
▢ 
ELL file 
▢ 
▢ 
Attendance records 
▢ 
▢      
Physical restraint records 
▢ 
▢ 
Counseling records 
▢ 
▢    
Correction of student record 
▢ 
▢      
Other (specify): _______________________________________   ▢ 
▢      
➤ The school should cross out those items which have not been 
requested. 
 
 
 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07 
Page 21 of 21 
 
Attachment 5, continued 
CERTIFICATION 
I, __________________________________________(Principal/School 
Leader) of  _______________________________________________________  
School, certify that to the best of my knowledge, all of the 
components of the student record that are requested, applicable 
to this student, and maintained by the school or on an electronic 
BPS system have been copied and delivered to the requestor,  
Name ___________________________________________________________ , 
on [date]______________________. 
________________________________________________ 
Signature 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-01 
Version 01 
 
HAZING LAW 
Massachusetts law makes it a crime to engage in hazing 
activities. Hazing means any conduct or method of initiation into 
any student organization, whether on public or private property, 
which willfully or recklessly endangers the physical or mental 
health of any student or other person. A copy of the 
Commissioner of Elementary and Secondary Education’s advisory 
is attached hereto as Attachment 1. 
Middle school principals, heads of school, and principals of K-8 
schools should treat hazing as a violation of Section 7.2.5 of the 
Code of Conduct with attendant sanctions. They are required by 
state law to take the following steps: 
1. Distribute a copy of the amended law [Attachment 1] to 
each school-based student organization on or before 
September 15. 
2. Obtain from each such student organization a statement, 
signed by a designated officer of the organization, 
indicating that: 
a. the organization has received a copy of the law. 
b. each of its members, plebes, pledges, or applicants 
has received a copy of the law. 
c. the organization understands and agrees to comply 
with the law. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-01 
Page 2 of 11 
 
The designated officer's signature should be 
witnessed by an adult (i.e., faculty advisor), who 
should also sign the statement. These statements 
should be retained in the main office. A sample 
acknowledgment is attached to this memorandum 
as Attachment 2 for your convenience. 
3. Distribute a copy of the law to all students in grades 7 
through 12 at least annually. Middle school principals, 
heads of school, and principals of K-8 schools must certify 
that the school complies with the anti-hazing law to the 
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education on or before October 1, by logging into the 
anti-hazing application accessible via MassEdu Gateway.  
4. The law also requires anyone who knows that another 
person is the victim of hazing to report such an incident 
to an appropriate law enforcement official as soon as 
possible and provides criminal penalties for failure to do 
so. 
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
By September 15 Building administrators distribute Attachment 
1 to all school-based student organizations. 
By October 1 
Middle school principals, heads of school, and 
principals of K-8 schools certify compliance 
with the anti-hazing law to DESE. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-01 
Page 3 of 11 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-01 
Page 4 of 11 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
 
REMINDER ABOUT MASSACHUSETTS LAW PROHIBITING THE 
PRACTICE OF HAZING 
School Year 2023-2024 Anti-Hazing Data Collection 
 
The anti-hazing law, which was enacted in 1985, applies only to 
secondary schools in Massachusetts. Please note that a middle 
school that has been designated as a secondary school by the 
school committee must comply with the anti-hazing law and 
regulations. 
Under Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 269, Sections 17–
19 and 603 CMR 33.00, all secondary schools, both public and 
private, must: 
• Adopt anti-hazing policies as part of their disciplinary 
policies. 
• Distribute copies of the anti-hazing law to all students 
enrolled full-time; to all student groups, teams, and 
organizations that are part of or are recognized by the 
school or are permitted by the school to use its name and 
facilities; and to all known unaffiliated student groups, 
teams, or organizations. 
Every year, secondary school principals/heads of school must: 
• Certify that you have read and understood the Anti-Hazing 
Policy and that the school has complied with the law by 
logging into the new Anti-Hazing application accessible via 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-01 
Page 5 of 11 
 
MassEdu Gateway at https://gateway.edu.state.ma.us/ 
• High school principals/heads of school (or a designee) who 
need access should be assigned their school’s Anti-Hazing 
user role by their district’s directory administrator. If you 
have questions about this, contact your directory 
administrator. 
• If your school does not have a directory administrator, or if 
you need help with your user ID and password, please 
contact Nermina Peric at nperic@doe.ma.us. 
• The schools must certify with the department on or before 
October 1. By November 1, the department must notify the 
Attorney General of any school that has not filed a report. 
• Collect a signed acknowledgement from a contact person 
for each student organization regarding distribution of 
information and agreement to comply with the law. The 
schools are not required to submit the Student Group Anti-
Hazing Form but should keep the form for their records. 
The guidance in this memorandum is intended to ensure that all 
public and private secondary schools meet their obligations 
under this important law and that students know the rules, 
expectations, and consequences regarding hazing. If you need 
additional information about the anti-hazing law and secondary 
schools' responsibilities, please contact Nermina Peric at 781-338-
3708. 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-01 
Page 6 of 11 
 
MASSACHUSETTS GENERAL LAWS — CHAPTER 269 
C. 269, S.17. Crime of Hazing: Definition: Penalty 
Whoever is a principal organizer or participant in the crime of 
hazing, as defined herein, shall be punished by a fine of not more 
than three thousand dollars or by imprisonment in a house of 
correction for not more than one year, or both such fine and 
imprisonment. 
The term "hazing" as used in this section and in sections eighteen 
and nineteen, shall mean any conduct or method of initiation 
into any student organization, whether on public or private 
property, which willfully or recklessly endangers the physical or 
mental health of any student or any other person. Such conduct 
shall include whipping, beating, branding, forced calisthenics, 
exposure to the weather, forced consumption of any food, liquor, 
beverage or drug or other substance, or any other brutal 
treatment or forced physical activity which is likely to adversely 
affect the physical health or safety of any such student or other 
person, or which subjects such student or other person to 
extreme mental stress, including extended deprivation of sleep 
or rest or extended isolation. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section to the 
contrary, consent shall not be available as a defense to any 
prosecution under this action. Added by St.1985, c.536; amended 
by St.1987, c.665. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-01 
Page 7 of 11 
 
C. 269, S.18. Duty to Report Hazing 
Whoever knows that another person is the victim of hazing as 
defined in section seventeen and is at the scene of such crime 
shall, to the extent that such person can do so without danger or 
peril to himself or others, report such crime to an appropriate law 
enforcement official as soon as reasonably practicable. Whoever 
fails to report such crime shall be punished by a fine or not more 
than one thousand dollars. Added by St.1985, c.536; amended by 
St.1987, c.665. 
C. 269, S.19. Hazing Statutes To Be Provided; Statement of 
Compliance and Discipline Policy Required 
Each institution of secondary education and each public and 
private institution of post-secondary education shall issue to 
every student group, student team or student organization which 
is part of such institution or is recognized by the institution or 
permitted by the institution to use its name or facilities or is 
known by the institution to exist as an unaffiliated student group, 
student team or student organization, a copy of this section and 
sections seventeen and eighteen; provided, however, that an 
institution’s compliance with this section’s requirements that an 
institution issue copies of this section and sections seventeen 
and eighteen to unaffiliated student groups, teams or 
organizations shall not constitute evidence of the institution’s 
recognition or endorsement of said unaffiliated student groups, 
teams or organizations. 
Each such group, team or organization shall distribute a copy of 
this section and sections seventeen and eighteen to each of its 
members, plebes, pledges, or applicants for membership. It shall 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-01 
Page 8 of 11 
 
be the duty of each such group, team or organization, acting 
through its designated officer, to deliver annually, to the 
institution an attested acknowledgement stating that such 
group, team or organization has received a copy of this section 
and said sections seventeen and eighteen, that each of its 
members, plebes, pledges or applicants has received a copy of 
sections seventeen and eighteen, and that such group, team or 
organization understands and agrees to comply with the 
provisions of this section and sections seventeen and eighteen. 
Each institution of secondary education and each public or 
private institution of post-secondary education shall, at least 
annually, before or at the start of enrollment, deliver to each 
person who enrolls as a full-time student in such institution a 
copy of this section and sections seventeen and eighteen. 
Each institution of secondary education and each public or 
private institution of post-secondary education shall file, at least 
annually, a report with the board of higher education and in the 
case of secondary schools, the board of education, certifying that 
such institution has complied with its responsibility to inform 
student groups, teams, or organizations and to notify each full 
time student enrolled by it of the provisions of this section and 
sections seventeen and eighteen and also certifying that said 
institution has adopted a disciplinary policy with regard to the 
organizers and participants of hazing, and that such policy has 
been set forth with appropriate emphasis in the student 
handbook or similar means of communicating the institution's 
policies to its students. The board of higher education and, in the 
case of secondary institution, the board of education shall 
promulgate regulations governing the content and frequency of 
such reports, and shall forthwith report to the attorney general 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-01 
Page 9 of 11 
 
any such institution, which fails to make such report. Added by 
St.1985, c.536; amended by St.1987, c.665; St.1998, c. 161 §§ 557, 558.  


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-01 
Page 10 of 11 
 
 ATTACHMENT 2 
SAMPLE ANNUAL STATEMENT OF ACKNOWLEDGEMENT FOR 
STUDENT GROUPS, TEAMS, AND ORGANIZATIONS 
ANTI-HAZING LAW, M.G.L. C. 269, §§ 17-19 
 
 
To: 
Secondary School Principal or Head of School 
 
On behalf of  _____________________________________________________  
(name of student group, team, or organization) 
I certify that the  _________________________________________________  
(name of student group, team, or organization) 
and its members, plebes, pledges, or applicants for membership 
have received a copy of An Act Prohibiting the Practice of Hazing, 
M.G.L. c. 269, §§ 17-19; and that the 
  __________________________________________________________________  
(name of student group, team, or organization) 
understands and agrees to comply with the law. 
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-01 
Page 11 of 11 
 
Date: ____________________________ 
Signed:  __________________________________________________________  
(Designated Officer) 
 __________________________________________________________________  
(Printed Name) 
 
Faculty Advisor or Leader: (for school affiliated group, team, or 
organization only) ________________________________________________  
 
Date Received by Principal or Designee: __________________________  
 
 
C:  School Files 
 
Central Office Files 


Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-03 
Version 01 
 
 
PUBLIC RECORDS REQUESTS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
School Department staff members frequently receive requests 
from individuals and agencies, asking for information or 
documents and cite the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) or the 
Massachusetts Public Records Law as the authority for honoring 
their requests. 
The Massachusetts Public Records Law, M.G.L. c. 66 §10, provides 
that any person has a right to access public records.  This right of 
access includes the right to inspect, copy or have copies of 
records provided upon payment of a reasonable fee.  The 
Massachusetts General Laws broadly define "public records" as 
any books, papers, maps, photographs, electronic storage media, 
computer files, digitally stored material, or any other information 
regardless of form, which is made or received by employees of 
public agencies unless the material falls into one of several 
recognized exemptions.  Requests for public record information 
must be in writing; therefore, you should require that any oral 
requests for public record information be placed in writing by the 
requestor prior to responding to such a request.  Such writing 
must be signed, dated, and contain the address of the requestor.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-03 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
RECORDS REQUEST 
All written public records requests must be sent to the Office of 
Legal Advisor or filed through the City of Boston’s public records 
request portal. You can access the public records request portal 
by visiting https://www.boston.gov/departments/public-records 
or clicking the “Public Records Request” link at the bottom of 
every page of the boston.gov website. To ensure a prompt 
response, use of the City’s public records request portal is the 
preferred method for all requests. The Office of Legal Advisor will 
review each request to see if it falls within an exception to the 
public records law and will coordinate with your office or school 
for the search, retrieval, and copying of such information. The law 
provides that Boston Public Schools must respond to a request 
for public records within ten (10) days of our receipt of such a 
request.  It is imperative, therefore, that once you receive a public 
records request, it is faxed or delivered to the Office of Legal 
Advisor.  It is also imperative that, if you receive a request from 
the Office of Legal Advisor to compile public records, you do so 
expeditiously or call the Office of Legal Advisor if you cannot 
comply in a timely manner with its request for information.   
SUBPOENA 
When receiving a subpoena for student records, personnel 
records, medical records, or any other document, a copy of the 
subpoena must be emailed or delivered immediately to the 
Office of Legal Advisor for review.  After that, please forward all 
responsive records with the original subpoena to the Office of 
Legal Advisor.  Such a subpoena should be emailed or delivered 
even if it is addressed to an individual, rather than the “keeper of 
the records.”  Witness subpoenas (i.e., a subpoena that seeks 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-03 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
testimony rather than documents) should also be emailed or 
delivered to the Office of Legal Advisor for appropriate 
consultation.  Please email legal@bostonpublicschools.org. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-09 
Version 01 
 
POLITICAL ACTIVITY BY PUBLIC EMPLOYEES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Public employees have most of the same rights as other citizens 
to engage in private political activity.  However, the conflict of 
interest law, M.G.L. c. 268A, restricts some political activity of 
public employees.  In addition, the campaign finance law, M.G.L. 
c. 55, restricts public employees’ political fundraising.  
PROHIBITED ACTIVITY 
The following restrictions are imposed by law on public 
employees and volunteers with respect to their participation in 
political activity whether on the local, state, or federal level. 
1. Participation in Political Activity 
• “Political activity” includes, but is not limited to, any activity 
that is in support of or in opposition to a federal, state, or 
local candidate or political party or a state or local ballot 
question. 
• In general, a public employee may not use their public 
position to engage in political activity. 
• Public employees may not participate in political activity: 
o during their usual business hours 
o while acting in an official capacity or while in official 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-09 
Page 2 of 6 
 
uniform   
o with the use of other public facilities or property and 
resources, such as staff time, public office space and 
facilities, public office equipment such as telephones 
and other communications equipment, computers, 
copiers, public websites and links to public websites, or 
public office supplies such as official stationery   
• Partisan political and campaign activity may be conducted 
by an employee only during non-business hours, including 
usual lunch hour, vacation time, personal time, or during a 
leave of absence without pay. 
2. Prohibitions Against Public Employees Soliciting Political 
Contributions 
It is a violation of state law for a public employee directly or 
indirectly to solicit or receive any contributions or anything of 
value for any political purpose, at any time — during both 
working and non-working hours. 
No person employed for compensation, other than an elected 
officer, by the commonwealth or any county, city or town shall 
directly or indirectly solicit or receive any gift, payment, 
contribution, assessment, subscription, or promise of money or 
other thing of value for the political campaign purposes of any 
candidate for public office or of any political committee, or for 
any political purpose whatever (Mass.  G.L. c. 55, Section 13, 
emphasis added). 
The principles supporting this prohibition — primarily to insulate 
public employees from inappropriate political pressures and in 
turn to ensure that employees do not use their public positions 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-09 
Page 3 of 6 
 
for personal or political gain — are important and must be 
strongly protected. 
This prohibition includes both direct and indirect solicitation: 
• A public employee may not ask any individual for a 
contribution on behalf of a political candidate or committee. 
• A public employee may not encourage an individual to 
contribute to a candidate for public or political office or to a 
political committee or sign a fundraising letter or 
advertisement on behalf of a candidate or political 
fundraising event. 
• A public employee may not sponsor or allow the use of their 
name on an invitation to a fundraising event or on a political 
fundraising request. 
• A public employee may not serve as a host or sponsor of a 
political fundraising event. 
• A public employee may not distribute or sell tickets to 
political fundraising events. 
It should be noted that Mass. G.L. c. 55, Section 7A, does permit 
public employees, as individuals, to make financial contributions 
to political campaigns. 
3. Solicitation In a Public Building 
No one may solicit a political contribution in a public building.  
Solicitations include requests for, or receipt of, a contribution and 
the distribution of fundraising letters or tickets.  Any public 
employee convicted of such solicitation of funds may be removed 
from employment without a hearing (Mass. G.L. c. 55, Section 14). 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-09 
Page 4 of 6 
 
4. Public Employees Seeking Elective Office 
Public employees seeking elective office may not solicit political 
contributions either directly or indirectly. 
Any of the prohibitions against solicitation, which apply to public 
employees, in general also apply to a public employee who is 
themself a candidate for political office.  Moreover, there are 
other restrictions which apply: 
• A public employee seeking office may attend an event held 
on their behalf by a non-elected committee, but may not 
encourage contributions, directly or indirectly. 
• A public employee seeking public office may not give 
permission to have their name appear on such invitation as 
the one who encourages contributions by an individual. 
PERMITTED ACTIVITY  
In general, public employees of all types may engage in private 
political activity, subject to the restrictions on political 
fundraising imposed by G.L. c. 55.  The conflict of interest law 
does not prohibit a public employee from engaging in political 
activity on their own time, using their own or other private 
resources, and when they are acting as an individual and not as 
an agent or representative of anyone else. 
INFORMATION 
• Elected and Policy-Making Officials:  The restrictions on 
public employee political activity are not the same for all 
public positions.  Elected officials may engage in more 
political activity than appointed officials and 
employees.  Public employees who hold policy-making 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-09 
Page 5 of 6 
 
positions have more leeway to make public statements and 
to take official action on political issues than do non-
policymakers.  Employees are encouraged to contact the 
Office of Legal Advisor with questions. 
• Campaign Finance:  Employees seeking information on 
particular questions are encouraged to call the 
Massachusetts Office of Campaign and Political Finance 
(OCPF). 
• Conflict of Interest:  Employees may refer to State Ethics 
Commission’s Advisory No. 11-1, entitled “Public Employee 
Political Activity,” a copy of which can be obtained by 
clicking this link:   
State Ethics Commission Advisory 11-1: Public Employee 
Political Activity | Mass.gov 
For information on campaign contributions and expenditures, 
please see G.L. c. 55. 
ENFORCEMENT 
The City intends to ensure that the legal restrictions on political 
activity by public employees are fully enforced.  This bulletin 
should serve as notice to public employees of the City of such 
restrictions and their implications. 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-09 
Page 6 of 6 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-14 
Version 01 
 
GATHERINGS ON SCHOOL GROUNDS AND 
DISTRIBUTION OF MATERIALS IN SCHOOLS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
It is permissible for schools to regulate the time, place, and 
manner of any demonstration to avoid disruption of classes or 
the orderly entrance and departure of students into and out of 
the building.  Accordingly, principals and heads of school are 
advised that gatherings of three (3) or more people or 
distribution of leaflets shall be regulated as follows: 
1. All gatherings or demonstrations should be viewed as a 
legal expression of First Amendment rights.  If a building 
administrator questions whether the material being 
distributed is protected by First Amendment rights, the 
Office of the Legal Advisor should be contacted immediately 
at 617-635-9320. 
2. All gatherings or demonstrations shall not disrupt school 
classes or the orderly entrance and departure of students 
into and out of the school building. 
3. The Students’ Freedom of Expression Law (G.L. c.  71, §82) 
permits students to plan peaceable assemblies on school 
property for the purpose of expressing their opinions.  
Building administrators may designate the time and place 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-14 
Page 2 of 4 
 
for such demonstrations to avoid disruption of classes and 
disorder in the school. 
4. All other gatherings or demonstrations which are not 
planned by students shall be restricted to areas off school 
property and in such areas as not to restrict the flow of 
traffic and school buses.  The building administrator may 
designate such areas.   
5. All gatherings or demonstrations shall be reported to the 
Boston Police Department (at 911), the operational leader, 
and the Department of Safety Services as soon as possible 
after the gathering and/or demonstration is organized.   
6. Gatherings in school buildings may be limited if school is 
being conducted remotely.  Any in-person gatherings or 
demonstrations will comply with public health guidelines 
including those that mandate group size limits, physical 
distancing, and the wearing of masks, as well as BPS policies 
regarding access to buildings.  
7. Materials and/or announcements of a public interest nature 
must be submitted to the administrator in charge two 
school days (at least 48 hours) prior to distribution for review 
and approval in order to be distributed in a school or a 
school-sponsored forum.  In addition, there should be no 
cost accrued by the BPS in the distribution of 
materials/announcements requested by external 
organizations.  The following materials shall be prohibited 
from circulation in schools or school-sponsored forums: 
• Advertisements of for-profit and political organizations 
and/or events sponsored by said organizations (including 
political and commercial flyers) 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-14 
Page 3 of 4 
 
• Materials including those promoting anything illegal or 
immoral and/or are otherwise pervasively indecent or 
vulgar 
• Materials which include false and/or misleading 
information and/or which interfere with the proper and 
orderly operation and discipline of the school 
8. Requests for collections and donations, which do not have 
the authorization of the School Department, shall be 
prohibited.  
9. The sale of merchandise, products, etc. by a recognized 
school/parent organization may be authorized with the prior 
approval of a building administrator.  
10. The sale and/or promotion of merchandise, products, etc. by 
an external organization/agency will not be authorized 
unless the proceeds are used for the support of educational 
programs and prior approval has been given. 
11. The sale of lottery tickets and/or other games of chance 
shall be prohibited. 
12. Distribution process: 
• Outside groups’ literature should not be distributed to 
students during instructional time and, if possible, should 
not be intermingled with official school notices, but may 
be posted on a bulletin board used for such materials. 
• Students should not be compelled to take home or read 
any outside group’s literature. 
• School newsletters and notices to parents may not recruit 
members for outside groups. 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-14 
Page 4 of 4 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
SSS-02 
Version 01 
 
HOMELESS STUDENTS — GUIDELINES AND 
PROCEDURES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or 
superseded by a subsequent version 
INTRODUCTION 
The McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, reauthorized in 
December 2015 through the federal Every Student Succeeds Act 
(ESSA), ensures educational rights and protection for children 
and youth experiencing homelessness.  
DEFINITION OF HOMELESSNESS  
The federal government defines a child or youth who is homeless 
as one who lacks a fixed regular and adequate residence or has a 
primary nighttime residence not designed for or ordinarily used 
as a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings. 
(McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, Section 103 (A) (1) (2)).  
Under the federal definition, the following children are 
considered homeless:  
• Children and youth who are sharing the housing of other 
persons due to loss of housing, economic hardship, or a 
similar reason; are living in motels, hotels, trailer parks, or 
camping grounds due to lack of alternative adequate 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 2 of 10 
 
accommodations; are living in emergency or transitional 
shelters; are abandoned in hospital; or are awaiting foster 
care placement.  
• Children and youth who have a primary nighttime residence 
that is a public or private place not designed for or ordinarily 
used as a regular sleeping accommodation for human 
beings.  
• Children and youth who are living in cars, parks, public 
spaces, abandoned buildings, substandard housing, bus or 
train stations, or similar settings. 
• Unaccompanied youth – youth not in the physical custody 
of a parent or guardian.  
Boston Public Schools (BPS) is responsible for ensuring the 
identification, enrollment, attendance, and academic success of 
students who are homeless. All personnel should be aware of the 
unique needs of children, adolescents, and families who are 
homeless. This growing population may be at risk due to the 
transitional nature and status of their lives. For children and 
adolescents, school may represent stability and consistency in 
what otherwise is often an unstable situation. We are committed 
to supporting our students who are experiencing homelessness 
and strive to keep students in their home schools.  
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND SCOPE  
This circular is intended to provide school staff with guidance 
regarding the rights of students who are homeless and provide 
them with the education services needed to ensure they have an 
equal opportunity to meet the same academic standards to 
which all students are held. There are, however, some procedures 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 3 of 10 
 
that may differ from the standard procedures. These may include 
choice of school, registration, transportation, record transfer, and 
confidentiality.  
SCHOOL SELECTION 
A student who is experiencing homelessness has the right to 
continue attending the school of origin (i.e., the school they were 
attending when permanently housed or the school in which they 
were last enrolled) or a school within the new community where 
they are temporarily housed. This right is guaranteed under the 
McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act. 
SCHOOL ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSPORTATION  
If a student who is attending the Boston Public Schools becomes 
homeless and needs transportation, the family should visit one of 
the BPS Welcome Centers: 
https://www.bostonpublicschools.org/welcomecenters 
Families requesting reassignment should also visit any of the 
Welcome Centers at various locations:  
• Roslindale: 515 Hyde Park Ave. Roslindale, 617-635-8040  
• Dorchester: 1216 Dorchester Ave. Dorchester, 617-635-8015  
• Roxbury: 2300 Washington St., Roxbury, 617-635-9010  
• East Boston: 312 Border Street, Boston, MA 02128,  
617-635-9597  
Families who are experiencing homelessness and move into 
Boston have the right to enroll their children in the Boston Public 
Schools. They should go to any Welcome Center Site to register. 
An individual may be considered to be homeless if that person is 
“doubled-up,” a term that refers to a situation where individuals 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 4 of 10 
 
are unable to maintain their housing situation and are forced to 
stay with a series of friends and/or extended family members.  
Students who become homeless and move to a shelter or other 
facilities outside the school district may continue to attend their 
school of origin. Transportation will be available if they reside 
within an hour of their school. Please contact the Homeless 
Education Resource Network (HERN) or 617-6359620 to discuss 
any difficulty that a child temporarily without a home may be 
experiencing.  
DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
If a dispute arises over enrollment and/or transportation, the local 
school district must immediately enroll the homeless student in 
the school in which enrollment is sought pending resolution of 
the dispute, and must provide the parent, guardian, or 
unaccompanied youth with both a written statement of the 
school placement decision and a notice of the right to appeal the 
decision. The school district must refer the unaccompanied 
youth, parent, or guardian to the homeless education liaison, who 
will expeditiously carry out the dispute resolution process. The 
final decision in such a situation resides with the Massachusetts 
commissioner of education.  
Reimbursement is available at the City of Boston mileage rate for 
parents who are sheltered outside of Boston and transport their 
children back to the school district.  
ATTENDANCE WAIVERS 
Students experiencing homelessness may have absences 
excused and will be assessed on a case-by-case basis.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 5 of 10 
 
An absence may be excused for the following reasons:  
• Students who are homeless in or out of district and are 
awaiting transportation.  
• Students who are tardy due to placement issues.  
Please contact Assistant Director, Opportunity Youth, for further 
information (Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org) 
SCHOOL ENROLLMENT AND RECORD TRANSFER  
Principals and heads of school should follow all current 
procedures for the transfer of academic and health records for 
students who are experiencing homelessness. Although not 
mandated, it is helpful if students who are temporarily without 
homes provide the following documentation at the time of 
registration:  
• Birth certificate  
• Immunization and medical records  
• Special Education Individual Educational Plan (IEP)  
SERVICES FOR STUDENTS WHO ARE HOMELESS AND NOT 
LIVING IN SHELTERS 
Students not living in shelters and are “doubled-up” and identify 
themselves as being homeless will have access to all services as 
outlined in this memorandum.  
A. Curriculum on Homeless Issues/Professional Development  
It is important to teach all staff and students about homelessness 
and its causes and conditions to ensure all students understand 
that homelessness is caused by lack of affordable housing and 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 6 of 10 
 
not the fault of a child temporarily without a home or their 
parent. The BPS Homeless Education Resource Network (HERN), 
as well as the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and 
Secondary Education, have several videos on homelessness 
available as well as expertise in workshop and curriculum 
planning. In addition, training and seminars on homelessness are 
available through HERN and are free to Boston Public Schools 
faculty and staff. To arrange for these at your school or to enroll in 
an upcoming professional development opportunity, contact 
Assistant Director, Opportunity Youth Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
Identification of a School-based Homeless Liaison  
Each school in the district must identify one staff member 
to serve as the main contact point for homeless services if 
one does not already exist (e.g., the school-based homeless 
liaison) to work in concert with HERN to connect the school 
and students and families experiencing homelessness, or at 
risk of homelessness, to city and state resources. The school-
based homeless liaison works collaboratively with HERN to 
ensure that students experiencing homelessness have the 
necessary individualized resources and support to learn. 
HERN provides multiple opportunities for school-based 
homeless liaisons to receive targeted professional 
development throughout the school year. School-based 
homeless liaisons serve an essential role in ensuring that all 
staff and students in their school understand the available 
services and process to request assistance.  
By October 1, school leaders should submit the name, contact 
information and title of their designated school-based homeless 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 7 of 10 
 
liaison to the Senior Director of Opportunity Youth Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
Identification and Referrals of Students Experiencing 
Homelessness  
Students and families experiencing homelessness or at risk 
of homelessness may request assistance using the HERN 
referral form, which is available electronically on the ASPEN 
Student Information System (SIS). A student or family 
member may request that any BPS staff member with 
ASPEN access submit a referral form on their behalf. This 
process increases access to assistance by allowing the 
referral to be submitted by a BPS staff member with whom 
the student or family member has a trusting relationship. 
This process will also increase the identification of students 
experiencing homelessness by making it easier for students 
and family members to make the request at the school level. 
School-based homeless liaisons are expected to inform all 
staff members in their school of the availability of the form 
on ASPEN and their role in being able to submit a referral on 
the student’s behalf. Once the form is submitted, HERN will 
proceed with its normal process of verifying the information. 
Once information has been verified and the student’s 
service needs have been identified, HERN will contact the 
designated school-based liaison to work collaboratively to 
institute a service plan for the student and/or family. The 
hard copy version of the HERN referral form will still be 
accepted and can be submitted directly to the HERN office 
or any of the three BPS Welcome Centers. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 8 of 10 
 
CONFIDENTIALITY  
For many reasons, homeless families may not want to reveal that 
their living status has changed. While most shelters encourage 
parents to notify the schools of a change in residence, they 
cannot mandate it, since state and federal laws which regulate 
confidentiality are very restrictive. Children who are temporarily 
without homes present many of the same characteristics as 
other at-risk children. Therefore, the best practice is to 
strengthen the communications between all parents and school 
personnel so that procedures are in place to reach out to families 
and students who are in transition or educationally at-risk. This 
means, at a minimum, schools should communicate frequently 
with parents and stress the necessity of updating the student’s 
emergency information.  
Schools, and school-based homeless liaisons in particular, are 
encouraged to maintain up-to-date records of students 
experiencing homelessness in the ASPEN SIS and communicate 
with HERN regularly to ensure adequate assistance and provision 
of services to students and families experiencing homelessness.  
In serving students who are homeless, please be mindful of the 
following:  
• Many students and parents who are temporarily without 
homes prefer to keep their current living situations private.  
• Students and their families may feel threatened and/or 
embarrassed if approached by school staff. Thus, to respect 
their privacy and confidentiality, school staff should not 
approach students or their families directly to discuss their 
temporary lack of permanent residence. Rather, students 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 9 of 10 
 
and families should be given the opportunity to raise the 
issue themselves if they so choose.  
• It may not be necessary for staff members to know that a 
student is homeless. Thus, school staff should be told this 
information on an as needed basis only.  
In the event of an emergency, or when services and information 
are lacking for a child believed to be homeless, contact Assistant 
Director, Opportunity Youth at 617-6359620 or Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
Senior Director of Health Services, 617-635-6788, should be 
notified if families do not present current immunization records 
at the time of registration.  
Home and Hospital Instruction provides services for students 
who are homeless and are impaired physically and/or mentally. 
For additional information, contact Home and Hospital program 
coordinator, 617-635-6633.  
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-02 
Page 10 of 10 
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner:  
Senior Director 
Department:  
Department of Opportunity Youth 
Mailing Address:  443 Warren Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone:  
617-635-9620 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SSS-18 
Version 01 
 
 
BULLYING PREVENTION AND INTERVENTION PLAN  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version.  
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS STATEMENT AGAINST STUDENT 
BULLYING  
Boston Public Schools will not tolerate any unlawful or disruptive 
behavior, including bullying, harassment, cyberbullying, 
discrimination, retaliation, or hate crimes in all forms and types 
towards others in any school or at school-related activities. Boston 
Public Schools will promptly investigate all reports and 
complaints of bullying and take prompt, effective action to end 
that behavior and prevent its recurrence. Action will include, 
where appropriate, referral to a law enforcement agency. Boston 
Public Schools will support this Bullying Prevention and 
Intervention Plan (“Plan”) in all aspects of its activities, including 
its curricula, instructional programs, staff development, family 
meetings/training, and extracurricular activities.  
Students, staff, families/caregivers, and any others who are 
concerned or want to report bullying may confidently talk to a 
trusted staff member or call the Safe Space and Bullying 
Prevention Hotline, 617-592-2378. Additional resources and 
support can be found at Succeed Boston. Succeed Boston leads 
this districtwide initiative.  


Page 2:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 2 of 44 
 
The Student Handbook, AUP (Acceptable Use Policy), and the 
Boston Public Schools Code of Conduct are updated annually to 
assure alignment, to include language prohibiting bullying, and 
cyberbullying, and to clearly define the consequences connected 
to it. The district and principals/heads of schools at all levels in the 
Boston Public Schools play a critical role in the ongoing 
development and implementation of the Bullying Prevention and 
Intervention Plan in the context of other whole school and 
community efforts to promote a positive school climate.  
Principals/school leaders have a primary role in teaching students 
to be civil to one another and promoting understanding of and 
respect for diversity and difference. Principals/school leaders have 
a responsibility for setting priorities and for staying up to date 
with this policy and current research on ways to prevent and 
effectively respond to bullying.  
The Boston Public Schools will not tolerate any unlawful or 
disruptive behavior, including any form of bullying, cyberbullying, 
or retaliation, in our school buildings, on school grounds, on 
school buses and at school bus stops, on a school bus or other 
vehicle owned, leased, or used by a school district; or through the 
use of technology or an electronic device owned, leased, or used  
by a school district, and or in school-related activities.  
Schools will promptly investigate all reports and complaints of 
bullying, cyberbullying, and retaliation and take prompt action to 
end that behavior and restore the target’s sense of safety. The 
Boston Public Schools will support this commitment in all aspects 
of our school community, including curricula, instructional 
programs, staff development, extracurricular activities, and 
families/caregivers involvement.  
A student who knowingly makes a false accusation of bullying will 


Page 3:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 3 of 44 
 
be subject to disciplinary action as defined by the BPS Code of 
Conduct.   
This Plan has been approved by the Massachusetts Department of  
Elementary and Secondary Education and is posted at the BPS 
Anti Bulling web page. Copies of this plan  shall be posted and 
readily accessible in all schools in an area visible to 
families/caregivers and staff.  The Plan will be reviewed and 
updated biennially, as mandated by M.G.L. c. 71, §  37O.  
PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT  
As required by M.G.L. c. 71, § 37O, this Plan has been developed in  
consultation with various constituencies. Since May 3, 2010, the  
Boston Public Schools has met biennially with families/caregivers, 
teachers, school administrators,  students, central administrators, 
and community stakeholders to  develop this Plan.   
Effective SY 2024-2025, an advisory group of teachers, 
administrators, families/caregivers and community members will 
be developed to review and make recommendations related to 
curricula, professional development, community and family 
engagement, and the Plan itself.  Consultation will include, at a 
minimum, notice and a public comment period prior to adoption.   
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE  
The Boston Public Schools believes that school communities 
serve as a network of support for its diverse students, families, and 
staff.  We are committed to providing our students with equal 
educational opportunities and a safe and welcoming learning 
environment where all students and community members treat 
each other with respect and appreciate the rich diversity in our 
schools.  


Page 4:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 4 of 44 
 
The Boston Public Schools recognizes that certain students may 
be more vulnerable to become targets of bullying, harassment, or 
teasing based on actual or perceived characteristics, including 
race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, socioeconomic, 
status, homelessness, academic status, gender identity or 
expression, physical appearance, or sensory, disability, or by 
association with a person who has or is perceived to have one or 
more of these characteristics. The Boston Public Schools will 
continuously work to identify specific steps it will take to create a 
safe, supportive environment for vulnerable populations in the 
school community, and provide all students with the skills, 
knowledge, and strategies to prevent or respond to bullying, 
harassment, or teasing. 
Under M.G.L. Ch. 71, § 37O, at the beginning of each school year, 
each school will provide the community, including students, 
administrators, external providers, families/caregivers, and staff 
with: 
● Written notice of its policies for reporting acts of bullying 
and retaliation, 
● A description of the reporting procedures and resources, 
including the name and contact information of the 
principal/school leader or designee 
● A copy of the Bullying Incident Reporting Form and 
information about electronic reporting and  
● Shall provide and post the available resources (including the 
number to the Safe Space and Bullying Hotline and 
information about electronic reporting) in the school’s main 
office, the school’s website, all counseling offices/spaces, the 
school nurse’s office, and other locations determined by the  


Page 5:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 5 of 44 
 
principal/school leader or designee 
The Boston Public Schools Bullying Prevention and Intervention 
Plan shall be incorporated in student and staff handbooks, on the 
school and district website, and made available to 
families/caregivers.  
DEFINITIONS UNDER M.G.L. CH. 71, § 37O  
Note: The following definitions contain terms and/or phrases that 
are different from the language of the statute. The language of 
the definitions in this circular is drafted to align with the 
definitions that are used in the Boston Public Schools Code of 
Conduct. BPS relies on these definitions when reviewing student 
conduct under the Code:   
● Bullying: BPS has replaced the word “victim” in the statute 
with the word “target.”  
● Cyberbullying: BPS has added (iv) to the definition contained 
in the statute.  
● Retaliation: this definition is not provided for under the 
statute but is operative in the Code of Conduct. 
● School Community: BPS has added “staff” to the definition 
contained in the statute.   
● Perpetrator: this definition is not provided for under the 
statute but is operative in the Code of Conduct. 
● Aggressor is a student who engages in bullying or 
cyberbullying. 
Bullying is the repeated use by one or more students or by a 
member of school staff including, but not limited to, an educator, 


Page 6:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 6 of 44 
 
administrator, school nurse, cafeteria worker, custodian, bus  
driver, athletic coach, advisor to an extracurricular activity, or  
paraprofessional of a written, verbal, or electronic expression or a  
physical act or gesture or any combination thereof, directed at a  
target that:  
I. 
Causes physical or emotional harm to the target or damage 
to the target's property  
II. 
Places the target in reasonable fear of harm to themselves 
or of damage to their property  
III. 
Creates a hostile environment at school for the target  
IV. 
Infringes on the rights of the target at school  
V. 
Materially and substantially disrupts the education process 
or the orderly operation of a school.  
Cyberbullying is bullying through the use of technology or any 
electronic communication which shall include, but shall not be 
limited to, any transfer of signs, signals, writing, images, sounds,  
data, or intelligence of any nature transmitted in whole or in part 
by a wire, radio, electromagnetic, photoelectric or photo-optical 
system, including, but not limited to, electronic mail, internet  
communications, instant messages or facsimile communications.  
Cyber-bullying shall also include:  
I. 
The creation of a web page or blog in which the creator 
assumes the identity of another person  
II. 
The knowing impersonation of another person as the author 
of posted content or messages, if the creation or 
impersonation creates any of the conditions enumerated in 


Page 7:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 7 of 44 
 
clauses (iv) to (v), inclusive, of the definition of bullying  
III. 
The distribution by electronic means of a communication to 
more than one person or the posting of material on an 
electronic medium that may be accessed by one or more 
persons, if the distribution or posting creates any of the 
conditions enumerated in clauses (i) to (v), inclusive, of  the 
definition of bullying  
IV. 
The use of the internet and/or social media used for bullying 
outside of school that disrupts the normal functioning of the 
school day.  
 
 
 


Page 8:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 8 of 44 
 
Hostile Environment is a situation in which bullying causes the 
school environment to be permeated with intimidation, ridicule, 
or insult that is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the 
conditions of a student’s education.  
Retaliation is any form of intimidation, reprisal, or harassment 
directed against a student who reports bullying, provides 
information during an investigation of bullying, or witnesses or 
has reliable information about bullying.   
The School Community consists of students, staff and 
families/caregivers. 
Staff includes, but is not limited to, educators, administrators, 
counselors, school nurses, cafeteria workers, custodians, bus 
drivers, athletic coaches, advisors to extracurricular activities, 
support staff, and paraprofessionals.  
Target is a student against whom bullying, cyberbullying, or 
retaliation has been perpetrated.  
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR REPORTING AND 
RESPONDING TO BULLYING AND RETALIATION  
To support efforts to respond promptly and effectively to bullying 
and retaliation, the Boston Public Schools have policies and 
procedures in place for receiving and responding to reports of 
bullying or retaliation. These policies and procedures ensure that 
members of the school community – students, 
families/caregivers, and staff – know what will happen when 
incidents of bullying are reported or occur (Attachment 1).   
The Boston Public Schools, in accordance with MA Law M.G.L. c. 


Page 9:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 9 of 44 
 
71, § 37O, has designated the principal/school leader or designee 
as the person responsible for receiving reports, recording 
incidents, and investigating all incidents.  The principal/head of 
school or designee is responsible for responding to and resolving 
all cases. All bullying allegations, no matter how they were 
reported, (e.g., through the Safe Space and Bullying reporting 
form or directly to the school leader, or directly to staff at the 
school), shall be submitted to Succeed Boston using the Safe 
Schools & Bullying Investigation form. All findings, including 
supporting information, including witness statements (target, 
aggressor, and any other relevant person) findings, and 
conclusions, shall be submitted to Succeed Boston within five 
school days, and findings of bullying shall be documented in the 
BPS Student Information System (SIS). 
A. Reporting Bullying or Retaliation  
Reports of bullying or retaliation can be made by staff,  students, 
families/caregivers or others, and can  be submitted through the 
Safe Space and Bullying Prevention Hotline at 617-592-2378 or 
directly online  through the Safe Schools and Bullying Prevention 
Incident Reporting Form. To report in your native language, 
please call the Hotline and ask for translation services. Allegations 
may also be submitted via email, text, or through the Bullying 
Incident Reporting Form (Attachment 3).  
All employees are required to report immediately to the 
principal/school leader or designee, any instance of bullying or 
retaliation the staff member becomes aware of or witnesses.   
Reports may be made anonymously (see Attachment 3 for the 
Boston Public Schools Safe Schools and Bullying Prevention and 
Intervention Reporting Form and Attachment 4 for the Boston 


Page 10:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 10 of 44 
 
Public Schools Safe Schools and Bullying Prevention and 
Intervention Anonymous Reporting Form).  
Use of the Boston Public Schools Safe Schools and Bullying 
Prevention and Intervention Reporting Form is not required as a 
condition to making a report.   
1. Reporting by Staff  
A staff member shall report immediately to the principal/school 
leader or designee when they witness or become aware of 
conduct that may be bullying or retaliation. The requirement to 
report to the principal/school leader or designee does not limit 
the authority of the staff member to respond to behavioral or 
disciplinary incidents consistent with each school’s policies and 
procedures for behavior management and discipline. 
2. Reporting by Students, Families/Caregivers, and Others  
Boston Public Schools expects students, families/caregivers, and 
others who witness or become aware of an instance of bullying or 
retaliation involving a student to report it to the principal/school 
leader or designee.  
Reports may be made anonymously or not by calling the Safe 
Schools and Bullying Prevention Hotline (617-592-2378) or filing a 
report online using the Safe Space and Bullying Prevention 
Reporting form. No disciplinary action will be taken against an 
alleged aggressor solely based on an anonymous report. 
Students, families/caregivers, and others may request assistance 
from a staff member to complete a written report. Students will 
be provided practical, safe, private, and age-appropriate ways to 
report and discuss an incident of bullying with a staff member or 
with the principal/school leader.  


Page 11:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 11 of 44 
 
3. Responding to a report of bullying or retaliation  
Before fully investigating the allegations of bullying or retaliation, 
the principal/school leader or designee will take steps to assess 
the need to restore a sense of safety to the alleged target and/or 
to protect the alleged target from possible further incidents. The 
principal/school leader or designee shall contact the 
families/caregivers prior to any investigation. Notice will be 
consistent with state regulations at 603 CMR 49.00.  
Under M.G.L. c. 71, § 37O, for children with special needs, the 
Principal/Head of School will review the child’s IEP to 
determine whether or not the child’s disability impacted or 
impacts their ability to comply with the Code of Conduct 
and/or this policy, and where appropriate, convene a TEAM 
meeting to discuss and decide the appropriate 
determination which may include behavioral support 
services or other specialized services. 
The principal/Head of School or designee shall inform the parent 
or guardian of the target about the Department of Elementary 
and Secondary Education’s Problem Resolution System (PRS) and 
the process for accessing that system, regardless of the outcome 
of the bullying determination. 
Responses to promote safety may include, but not be limited to:  
● Creating a personal safety or support plan 
● Pre-determining seating arrangements for the target and/or 
the aggressor in the classroom, at lunch, or on the bus 
● Identifying a staff member who will act as a “safe person” for 
the target 
● Altering the aggressor’s schedule and access to the target.  


Page 12:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 12 of 44 
 
 
The principal/school leader or designee will take additional steps 
to promote safety during and after the investigation, as necessary. 
They will implement appropriate strategies to protect students 
from bullying or retaliation as a result of witnessing, providing 
information during an investigation, reporting bullying or 
retaliation or providing reliable information about a reported act 
of bullying or retaliation. 
The confidentiality of students and witnesses reporting alleged 
acts of bullying will be maintained to the extent possible, given 
the school’s obligation to investigate the matter.  
B. Obligations to Notify Others   
1. Notice to Families/Caregivers:  
Within 24 hours of receipt of the bullying complaint and before 
interviewing students, the principal/school leader or designee will 
notify the families/caregivers of the target and the aggressor of 
the allegations and their intent to interview their child.   
Families of all student witnesses who may be interviewed will be 
notified of their intent to interview their child.  Should they 
choose, the family has the right to be present for the interview 
with their child.  Upon completion of the investigation (not 
beyond five school  days after the receipt of the complaint), the 
principal/school leader will notify the families/caregivers of the 
target and the aggressor of the findings of the investigation and 
the  procedures used in responding to the complaint.  
To ensure the safety of students and compliance with all BPS 
mandates and State laws, repeated allegations from 
families/caregivers and/or no response from  the head of school 


Page 13:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 13 of 44 
 
will be forwarded to the Operational  Leader and the School 
Superintendent for follow-up assistance.    
2. Notice to Another School or District:  
If the reported incident involves students from more than one 
school district, charter school, nonpublic school, approved private 
special education day or residential  school, or collaborative 
school, the principal/school leader or designee first informed of 
the incident will promptly notify by telephone the principal/school 
leader or designee of the other school(s) of the incident so that  
each school may take appropriate action.  All communications will 
be in accordance with state and  federal privacy laws and 
regulations and 603 CMR 23.00. 
3. Notice to Law Enforcement:  
At any point after receiving a report of bullying or retaliation, 
including after an investigation, if the principal/school leader or 
designee has a reasonable basis to believe that criminal charges 
may be pursued against the aggressor, the principal/school leader 
shall consult with their Operational Leader, the School 
Superintendent, the Office of Safety Services and/or the Boston 
Police Department School Unit, and other individuals the 
principal/school leader or designee deems appropriate.   
Note that pursuant to 603 CMR 49.06(2), notification to law 
enforcement is not required in those situations in which the 
school leader determines that the bullying and retaliation can 
be handled appropriately within the school district or school.  
Also, if an incident occurs on school  grounds and involves a 
former student under the age of  21 who is no longer enrolled 
in school, the principal/head  of school or designee shall 
contact their Operational Leader, the School Superintendent, 
the Office of Safety Services and/or the Boston Police 
Department School Unit, for notification to law enforcement if 


Page 14:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 14 of 44 
 
they have a reasonable basis to believe that criminal charges 
may be pursued against the aggressor.   
In making this determination, the principal/School leader will, 
consistent with the Plan and with applicable school or district 
policies and procedures, consult with their Operational Leader, 
the School Superintendent, Office of Safety Services and/or the 
Boston Police Department School Unit and other  individuals 
the principal/school leader or designee deems appropriate.  
The Superintendent’s Office shall be notified.  
 
 


Page 15:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 15 of 44 
 
C. Investigation (see Attachment 1)  
The principal/school leader or designee will promptly investigate 
all reports of bullying or retaliation and, in doing so, will consider 
all available information known, including the nature of the 
allegation(s) and the ages of the students involved. All reports of 
staff on student bullying shall be investigated as such, and the 
Office of Labor Relations shall be notified.  
During the investigation, the school leader or their designee shall 
notify the families/caregivers of the intent to interview their child 
and will proceed (in the presence of the families/caregivers, if 
requested) to gather information, interview students, staff, 
witnesses, and others as necessary.  
The principal/school leader or designee will remind the alleged 
aggressor, target, and witnesses that retaliation is strictly 
prohibited and will result in disciplinary action, per section 7.6.3 of 
the Boston Public Schools Code of Conduct.  
Interviews will be conducted by the principal/school leader or 
designee, and in consultation with the school counselor, as 
appropriate.  To the extent practicable and given their obligation 
to investigate and address the matter, the principal/school leader 
or designee will maintain confidentiality during the investigative 
process. The  principal/school leader or designee will maintain a 
written  record of the investigation and upon completion, will file 
and forward the  Safe Schools and Bullying Prevention 
Investigation Form and any additional materials to 
saws@bostonpublicschools.org. 
Procedures for investigating reports of bullying and retaliation will 
be consistent with district policies and procedures for 
investigations and for possible disciplinary action. If necessary, the 


Page 16:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 16 of 44 
 
principal/school leader or designee will consult with Succeed 
Boston regarding consultation or appeals from 
families/caregivers. The Office of the Superintendent shall be 
notified should legal counsel pertaining to the investigation of the 
alleged report be necessary. (See Attachment 1 for more specifics.)  
D. Determinations  
The principal/school leader or designee will make a determination 
of bullying based upon the definition of bullying, the interviews 
with students, staff, and families/caregivers. If, after investigation, 
bullying or retaliation is substantiated, the principal/school leader 
or designee will take steps reasonably calculated to prevent 
recurrence and to ensure that the target is not restricted in 
participating in school or in benefiting from school activities.  
Within 5 days of receipt of the allegation, the principal/school 
leader or designee will:   
1. Determine what remedial action is required (e.g., 
Safety/Support Plan, seating plan), if any 
2. Determine what responsive actions and/or disciplinary 
action is necessary, if any  
3. Notify the families/caregivers of the target and the 
aggressor about the results of the investigation and, if 
bullying or retaliation is found, what action is being taken to 
prevent further acts of bullying or retaliation  
4. Submit the investigation and findings using the Safe 
Schools and Bullying Prevention Investigation Form and, if 
bullying was found, document the finding in the BPS SIS.  
Depending upon the circumstances, the principal/school leader or 
designee may choose to consult with the student’s teacher(s) 
and/or school counselor, and the target’s or aggressor’s 


Page 17:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 17 of 44 
 
families/caregivers, to identify any underlying social or emotional 
issue(s) that may have contributed to the bullying behavior and to 
assess the level of need for additional social skills development.   
All notices to families/caregivers must comply with applicable 
state and federal privacy laws and regulations. Because of the 
legal requirements regarding the confidentiality of student 
records, the principal/head of school or designee cannot report 
specific information to the target’s families/caregivers about the 
disciplinary action taken unless it involves a “stay away” order or 
other directives that the target must be aware of in order to 
report violations.   
For students with disabilities, the principal/school leader will 
review the child’s IEP to determine whether the child’s disability 
impacted or impacts their ability to comply with the Code of 
Conduct and/or this policy, and where appropriate, convene a 
TEAM meeting to discuss and decide  the appropriate 
determination which may include  behavioral support services or 
other specialized services.  
NEW: Right to Appeal decisions related to the bullying 
investigation, findings, and/or response may be submitted 
using this link.   
 
 


Page 18:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 18 of 44 
 
E. Planning & Oversight  
The following school or district leaders are responsible for the 
following tasks under the Plan: 
Task  
Responsible Party 
1) Receiving reports on bullying  
Succeed Boston, School 
Administrators, School Staff 
2) Collecting and analyzing building- 
and/or school-wide data on bullying 
to assess the present problem and to 
measure improved outcomes 
Succeed Boston, 
Superintendent’s Office, Office of 
Data and Accountability, 
RP/SAWS  
3) Creating a process for recording 
and tracking incident reports, and for 
accessing information related to 
targets and aggressors 
Succeed Boston, Office of Data 
and Accountability  
4) Planning for the ongoing 
professional development that is 
required by the law 
Succeed Boston 
5) Planning supports that respond to 
the needs of targets and aggressors 
Succeed Boston, RP/SAWS, 
Regional Liaison Teams 
6) Choosing and implementing the 
curricula that the school or district 
will use 
Succeed Boston, Office of Equity, 
Bullying Prevention and 
Intervention Advisory Group 


Page 19:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 19 of 44 
 
7) Developing new or revising current 
policies and protocols under the Plan, 
including an Internet Safety Plan, and 
designating key staff to be in charge 
of implementation 
Principals, school leaders, 
Succeed Boston, Office of the 
Legal Advisor, Office of Equity, 
Bullying Prevention and 
Intervention Advisory Group 
8) Amending district-wide and 
school-based student and staff 
handbooks and Codes of Conduct 
Succeed Boston, Operational 
Leaders, BPS Code of Conduct 
Team and Office of the Legal 
Advisor 
9) Leading the families/caregivers or 
family engagement efforts and 
drafting information materials 
Succeed Boston, Office of Family 
and Community Advancement, 
Parent University 
10) Reviewing and updating the Plan 
biennially, or more frequently as 
needed 
Superintendent’s Office, 
Succeed Boston, Bullying 
Prevention and Intervention 
Advisory Group, Office of the 
Legal Advisor, Office of Equity 
As required by Chapter 86, of the Acts 
of 2014, which amended G.L. c. 71, 
§37O, the Boston Public Schools will 
administer a department-developed 
student survey at least once every 
four years to assess “school climate 
and the prevalence, nature and 
severity of bullying in schools.” (G.L. c. 
71, §37O(k)). This may include results 
of the student/staff/family climate 
Succeed Boston, Office of Data 
and Accountability, Operational 
Team 
 
 


Page 20:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 20 of 44 
 
survey. 
 
Each school community member is responsible for:  
1. complying with this Plan, where applicable  
2. ensuring that they do not harass, discriminate against, or 
commit a crime against another person on school grounds 
or in a school-related activity because of that person’s race, 
color, religion, national origin, ethnicity, sex, sexual 
orientation, age, or disability   
3. ensuring that they do not bully another person on 
school grounds or in a school-related activity  
4. ensuring that they do not retaliate against any other 
person for reporting or filing a complaint, for aiding or 
encouraging the filing or a report or complaint, or for 
cooperating in an investigation of harassment, bullying, 
discrimination, or a hate crime   
 
5. cooperating in the investigation of reports or complaints 
of harassment, bullying discrimination, retaliation, or a hate 
crime.  
TRAINING & PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT  
As required under M. G. L. c. 71, § 37O, Boston Public Schools 
requires annual bullying prevention and intervention training 
(available in person or asynchronously) for all school staff, 
including lunch monitors, school police officers, secretaries, bus 


Page 21:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 21 of 44 
 
drivers, teachers, administrators, and all other itinerant staff.  All 
training is posted on Vector. For more information contact 
Succeed Boston @ the Counseling and Intervention Center, (617) 
635-8123.  
Annual Staff Training on the Plan  
Boston Public Schools will offer professional development to all 
administrators, teachers, paraprofessionals, and all ancillary staff 
members under the employment of the Boston Public Schools.  
This includes Identifying Bullying Behavior, Types of Bullying, 
Roles of Aggressors/Targets/Bystanders, Rights and 
Responsibilities under the Law M. G. L. c. 71, § 37O, Information 
regarding the most-risk populations (including LGBTQ+ students, 
students with disabilities, English Language Learners), Internet 
Safety, Reporting Responsibility, Adult Bias, and Addressing 
Student Bias-Based Speech and Behavior.  
Advanced Training 
To provide effective bullying prevention and intervention services 
and to build capacity, each school shall have at least 2 staff 
trained as Bullying   
Intervention Specialists (BIS). These specialists will:  
● Serve as a resource to their school community on bullying 
related matters 
● Lead relevant training within their school community 
● Coordinate the reporting and/or investigating of incidents if 
designated by their school leader. 
The Regional RP/SAWS will provide semi-annual training to the 
regional BIS teams that will further develop best practices and 


Page 22:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 22 of 44 
 
resources.   
Boston Public Schools will provide a 2-day Bullying Intervention 
Specialist professional development quarterly throughout the 
year. The advanced bullying intervention specialist training (see 
Attachment 2) will be posted on Vector.  
The training will include:   
i. developmentally appropriate strategies to prevent and 
intervene in bullying incidents   
ii. information regarding the complex interaction and 
power differential that can take place between and 
among an aggressor, target, and witnesses to the 
bullying   
iii. research findings on bullying, and resources for the 
development of programs in schools   
iv. information on the incidence and nature of 
cyberbullying and internet safety issues  
v. bias-based bullying and sexual harassment 
vi. issues specific to LGBTQ+ students  
viii. students with disabilities 
● legal rights/IDEA/FAPE  
ix. adult bias and impact on bullying intervention 
and prevention.  
● The Regional RP/SAWS will continue to share literature 
covering the latest information in bullying prevention & 
intervention.  This literature will include strategies for 


Page 23:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 23 of 44 
 
creating a culture and environment that will prevent 
bullying.   
● Professional Development opportunities to identify 
strategies for students with disabilities who are either 
accused of or are targets of bullying (per BPS Code of 
Conduct).   
● Annual updated electronic links to the Bullying Prevention 
and Intervention Protocols.   
 
 


Page 24:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 24 of 44 
 
 
ACCESS TO RESOURCES AND SERVICES  
A key aspect of promoting positive school climates that provide 
students with feelings of belonging and safety is ensuring that 
the underlying emotional needs of all students are addressed. 
These students include targets, aggressors, and bystanders of 
bullying or cyberbullying. The Boston Public Schools will also 
address the emotional needs of these students’ families.  Please 
see Anti-Bullying Resources for further information.  
Identifying resources in schools   
● School staff, together with building administrators, will work 
to identify the school’s capacity to provide counseling, case 
management, and other services for students (targets, 
aggressors, bystanders) and their families.  Curricula and 
resources can be accessed through the Boston Public 
School’s Succeed Boston’s website succeedboston.org  
● Schools will conduct an annual review of staffing and 
programs that support the creation of positive school 
environments, focusing on early interventions and intensive 
services, and develop recommendations and action steps to 
fill resource and service gaps.   
● The Boston Public Schools will continue to work in 
collaboration with local and state agencies to adopt 
evidence-based curricula and to provide additional 
preventive services to students, families/caregivers and all 
school staff.   
 
 


Page 25:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 25 of 44 
 
 
Counseling and other services   
● Succeed Boston’s Student Support and Prevention 
Workshops  provide an alternative to a suspension to 
increase students’ understanding about the impact of 
bullying, build empathy and social and emotional skills to 
stop and prevent bullying.   
● School counselors, nurses, school psychologists, and special 
educators provide a variety of skill-based services to students 
within the educational setting that include ongoing 
emotional support, risk assessment, crisis intervention, and 
help with community-based counseling referrals when 
appropriate.   
● School staff meet with families/caregivers and teachers as 
needed to help address students’ academic, social, 
emotional, and behavioral concerns as collaboratively as 
possible.   
● Regional liaisons, especially the RP/SAWS, will work with 
school teams and administrators to develop and, if needed, 
co-facilitate culturally and linguistically appropriate 
resources to identified families.   
● School counselors maintain up-to-date information on 
community-based mental health referrals as well as 
Community Service Agencies (CSAs) within the local area, 
providing services to students and families.   
● Regional liaisons, especially the RP/SAWS, will work 
collaboratively with and support the BIS, school counselors, 
school psychologists, and intensive special needs educators 


Page 26:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 26 of 44 
 
to: 
1. Develop behavior plans and groups for students to build 
upon their social and emotional skills, 
2. Educate and support families/caregivers,   
3. Conduct workshops for families/caregivers 
4. Connect families/caregivers of outside resources to build 
skills    
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES   
As required by M. G. L. c. 71B, § 3, as amended by Chapter 92 of  the 
Acts of 2010, when the IEP Team determines that the student  has 
a disability that affects social skills development or the  student 
may participate in or is vulnerable to bullying,  harassment, or 
teasing because of their disability, the Team will  consider what 
should be included in the IEP to develop the  student’s skills and 
proficiencies to avoid and respond to bullying,  harassment, or 
teasing. 
REFERRAL TO OUTSIDE SERVICES   
Boston Public Schools school counselors and other specialists will 
help students and families access appropriate and timely services 
necessary to address student needs as a result of bullying.  
Referrals shall comply with relevant laws and policies.   
ACADEMIC & NON-ACADEMIC ACTIVITIES  
The Boston Public Schools will provide age-appropriate 
instruction on bullying prevention in each grade and incorporate 
it into the school’s or district’s curricula. Succeed Boston provides 
online Student Support and Prevention Workshops to students in 


Page 27:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 27 of 44 
 
grades 1-12 to learn about the impact of bullying and develop skills 
to stop and prevent bullying.   
Effective instruction will include classroom approaches, whole 
school initiatives, focused strategies for bullying prevention, and 
social skills development.   
Specific bullying prevention approaches:   
● Using scripts and role plays to develop skills.  
● Empowering students to take action by knowing what to do 
when they witness other students engaged in acts of 
bullying or retaliation, including seeking adult assistance.   
● Helping students understand the dynamics of bullying and 
cyberbullying, including the underlying power imbalance.  
● Build and reinforce student empathy.  
● Reinforce and elevate students who model being helpful 
bystanders 
● Emphasizing cyber safety, including safe and appropriate 
use of electronic communication technologies  
● Enhancing students’ skills for engaging in healthy 
relationships and resolving conflicts with respectful 
communications.  
● Engaging students in a safe, supportive school environment 
that  
● is respectful of diversity and difference.  
 
 


Page 28:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 28 of 44 
 
General teaching approaches that support bullying prevention 
efforts:  
● Create a strong anti-bullying plan that will be enforced first 
and foremost by adults   
● Build in learning and embed bullying in the curriculum (e.g., 
ELA, social studies, history, health classes)  
● Empower bystanders who witness bullying activities with 
skills and support to intervene appropriately  
● Promote acceptance and respect in order to improve the 
school climate to include all students in meaningful ways  
● Help students and staff understand the definition of bullying 
– what it is and what it isn’t (e.g., conflict, fighting, teasing)  
● Recognize the dynamics and complexities involved in 
aggressor-target relationships  
● Develop intervention programs that will reduce the 
prevalence of bullying behaviors and create a safe school 
climate that fosters positive learning experiences for all 
students  
● Be creative in developing strategies to promote social 
competence for children who are aggressors, targets of 
bullying, and bystanders 
● Develop ways to help students who are aggressors find more 
prosocial ways of experiencing positive rewards  
● Build an effective support system for protecting targets of 
bullying.  


Page 29:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 29 of 44 
 
The Boston Public Schools has incorporated a range of 
individualized strategies and interventions that may be used in 
response to remediate a student’s skills or to prevent further 
incidents of bullying and/or retaliation. Combining and 
incorporating a Multi-Tiered System of Support (MTSS), social and 
emotional skill building, school-wide positive behavior 
interventions and supports (PBIS) focused on prevention services  
school-wide, creates a level change across the classroom, school,  
and district.  These changes not only improve outcomes but 
address and improve the academic and non-academic needs of 
all students, including students with disabilities.   
TEACHING APPROPRIATE BEHAVIOR THROUGH SKILL BUILDING  
Upon the principal/school leader or designee determining that 
bullying or retaliation has occurred, the law requires that the 
school or district use a range of responses that balance the need  
for accountability with the need to teach appropriate behavior.  
M.G.L. c. 71, § 37O.  
Skill-building approaches that the principal/school leader or 
designee may consider include:  
● referring students to Succeed Boston online Student 
Support and Prevention Workshops for students in grades 1- 
12 to learn about the impact of bullying and develop skills to  
stop and prevent bullying   
● providing relevant push in support and co-facilitation of 
educational and social and emotional skill building activities 
for individual students or groups of students, in consultation 
with school counselors and other appropriate school 
personnel  
● implementing a range of academic and nonacademic 


Page 30:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 30 of 44 
 
positive behavioral supports to help students understand 
prosocial ways to achieve their goals.  
● meeting with families/caregivers to support and to reinforce 
the anti-bullying curricula and social skills building activities 
at home 
● adopting support plans to include a focus on developing 
specific social skills; making a referral for evaluation.  
TAKING DISCIPLINARY ACTION  
If the principal/school leader or designee decides that disciplinary 
action is appropriate, the disciplinary action will be determined 
based on facts found by the principal/school leader  or designee, 
including the nature of the conduct, the age of the  student(s) 
involved, a child’s IEP where appropriate, and the need  to balance 
accountability with the teaching of appropriate  behavior.  
Discipline will be consistent with the Boston Public Schools 
Bullying Prevention and Intervention Plan, the Boston  Public 
Schools Code of Conduct, and with the school-based  student 
handbook.  Discipline procedures for students with disabilities are 
governed by the federal Individuals with  Disabilities Education 
Act (IDEA), which should be read in  cooperation with state laws 
regarding student discipline.  
If the principal/school leader or designee determines that a 
student knowingly made a false allegation of bullying or 
retaliation, that student may be subject to disciplinary action  
consistent with the BPS Code of Conduct.  
 
 


Page 31:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 31 of 44 
 
 
PROMOTING SAFETY FOR THE TARGET AND OTHERS 
The principal/school leader or designee(s) will consider what 
adjustments (including a safety/support/action plan) are needed 
in the school environment to assure the target's sense of safety 
and that of others.   
Within a reasonable period following the determination and the 
ordering of remedial and/or disciplinary action, the 
principal/school leader or designee will contact the target and the 
families/caregivers to determine whether there has been a 
recurrence of the prohibited conduct and whether additional 
supportive measures are needed. If so, the principal/school leader 
or designee will work with appropriate school staff to implement 
them immediately.  
COLLABORATION WITH FAMILIES/CAREGIVERS  
The Boston Public Schools Bullying Prevention and Intervention 
Plan includes strategies to engage and collaborate with students’ 
families/caregivers to increase the capacity of each of  our schools 
as well as the district to prevent and respond to  bullying. 
Resources for families/caregivers and communication with them 
are essential aspects of effective collaboration. The bullying 
prevention and intervention curricula used by the schools shall be 
made available to families/caregivers and include:  
1. How families/caregivers can reinforce the curricula at 
home and support the school or district plan 
2. The dynamics of bullying  
3. Online safety and cyberbullying 


Page 32:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 32 of 44 
 
Families/caregivers will also be notified in writing each year about 
the student-related sections of the Boston Public Schools Bullying 
Prevention and Intervention Plan and the Boston Public Schools 
Internet Acceptable Use Policy.  
Schools will collaborate with School Site Councils and parent 
organizations to create families/caregivers’ resources and 
information networks. Schools will join with these 
families/caregivers groups to offer education programs for them 
that are focused on the components of the anti-bullying curricula 
and any social competency curricula used by the school(s).   
Schools will annually inform families/caregivers of enrolled 
students about the anti-bullying curricula that are being used.  
This notice will include information about the dynamics of 
bullying, including cyberbullying and online safety.  All notices 
and information made available to families/caregivers will be in 
hard copy and electronic formats and will be available in the 
language(s) most prevalent in BPS.  Each school will post the 
Boston Public Schools Bullying Prevention and Intervention Plan 
and related information on its website.  
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS  
Consistent with state and federal laws and the policies of the 
school or district, no person shall be discriminated against in 
admission to a public school of any town or in obtaining the  
advantages, privilege, and courses of study of such public school  
on account of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, or sexual  
orientation. Nothing in the Boston Public Schools Bullying 
Prevention and Intervention Plan prevents the school or district  
from taking action to remediate discrimination or harassment 
based on a person’s membership, or perceived membership, in a 
legally protected category  under local, state, or federal law, or 


Page 33:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 33 of 44 
 
school or district policies. 
In addition, nothing in this Plan is designed or intended to limit 
the authority of the school or district to take disciplinary action or  
other action under M.G.L. c. 71, §§ 37H or 37H½, other applicable  
laws, or local school or district policies in response to violent,  
harmful, or disruptive behavior, regardless of whether this Plan  
covers the behavior. 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner: 
Senior Director of Succeed Boston @ the 
Counseling and Intervention Center 
Department:  
Succeed Boston @ the Counseling and 
Intervention Center 
Mailing 
Address:  
515 Hyde Park Ave, Roslindale, MA 02131 
Phone:  
617-635-8123 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
saws@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent  
 
 


Page 34:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 34 of 44 
 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
1. How to Conduct a Bullying Investigation  
2. Professional Development — Bullying Intervention Specialist 
Training  
3. Safe Schools and Bullying Prevention and Intervention 
Reporting Form  
 
 


Page 35:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 35 of 44 
 
ATTACHMENT 1: 
HOW TO COMPLETE A BULLYING INVESTIGATION 
Step 1: After contacting families/caregivers, set up a 
meeting with the alleged targeted student (target)  
Are there safety concerns? If yes, develop a safety plan with the 
input of the target and the families/caregivers.  
a. Consider class seating, bus, lunch, recess, and “specials.”   
b. With the help of the targeted student, identify a trusted 
adult the student can go to for assistance.  
● Notify the trusted adult of the plan.  
● Notify the teacher(s) of the allegation and the trusted 
adult.  
c. Consider an inconspicuous way the target could signal in 
real-time that something was happening and/or the target 
needed to leave the room to go to a prior agreed-upon class, 
office, person.  
d. Take a statement from the target and get the names of 
witnesses if any.  
Step 2: After contacting the families/caregivers of the alleged 
aggressor, set up a meeting with the student.  
Are there any safety concerns? If yes, develop a safety or action 
plan with the input of the aggressor and the families/caregivers.   
a. Consider class seating, bus, lunch, recess, and 
“specials.”   


Page 36:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 36 of 44 
 
b. With the help of the aggressor, identify a trusted adult 
the student can go to for assistance.  
c. Notify the trusted adult of the plan.  
d. Notify the teacher(s) of the allegation and the trusted 
adult.  
e. Consider an inconspicuous way the target could signal in 
real-time that something was happening, and/or the target 
needed to leave the room to go to a prior agreed-upon 
class, office, or person.  
If there are no safety concerns for the aggressor, develop an 
action plan that keeps the target and aggressor separate.   
a. Consider class seating arrangements, lunch bus, “specials” 
and recess.  
b. Notify the teacher(s) of the allegation, and any action 
plans developed.  
c. Take a statement from the alleged aggressor.  
Step 3: Document statements from all witnesses  
Step 4: Assess whether the situation meets the standard for 
bullying:   
1. Power imbalance  
2. Repeated  
3. Intentional   
 
 


Page 37:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 37 of 44 
 
 
Step 5: Does this allegation involve targeting based on, or 
perceived, membership in a protected class (race, color,  national 
origin, ethnicity, religion, pregnancy, homelessness,  criminal 
record, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability,  age, 
genetics, or active military status?)   If yes, contact the Boston 
Public Schools Office of Equity.  
If no, proceed to step 6.   
Step 6: All allegations of bullying that have been investigated  
must be filed with Succeed Boston by completing the Safe 
Space and Bullying Prevention Investigation Reporting Form 
and documented in the BPS SIS.  
1. Document dates of meetings and calls with 
families/caregivers.  
2. Document all interviews.  
3. Determine if the allegation is bullying, retaliation, simple 
conflict, or Code of Conduct violation.  
4. Document action taken.  
5. Schedule a date to follow up with all parties.  
6. Document incident in SIS under the Conduct Module 
Section 7.1. of the Code of Conduct.  
Please note:   
● Upon receipt of the bullying complaint, the principal/school 
leader or designee must confirm receipt of the complaint to 
the families/caregivers within 24 hours.  


Page 38:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 38 of 44 
 
● The investigation must be completed within 5 school days, 
and the principal/school leader or designee will notify the 
families/caregivers of the target and the aggressor of the 
findings, and of the procedures for responding to it.  
● To ensure the safety of students and compliance with all BPS 
mandates and State laws, repeated allegations from 
families/caregivers and/or no response from the 
principal/school leader will be forwarded to the operational 
leader and the school superintendent for follow-up. 
 
 


Page 39:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 39 of 44 
 
ATTACHMENT 2: 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 12 HOUR PROFESSIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
“Bullying Intervention Specialist Training”  
To build capacity across the district and effectively deal with 
allegations of bullying, each school must have at least two staff 
complete the 12-hour training leading to certification as a 
“Bullying Intervention Specialist.” Once certified, these specialists 
will lead the annual bullying prevention and intervention training 
at their schools and will spearhead the creation and maintenance 
of Caring Communities and Bully Free  Schools. Succeed Boston 
will offer quarterly training sessions throughout the school year. 
Please register on Teach Point.  
In this training, staff will:   
● Learn about state and district regulations, procedures and 
protocols  
● Become familiar with BPS reporting and investigation 
protocols   
● Develop safety plans for targets and action plans for 
aggressors   
● Learn about the different types of bullying   
● Differentiate between bullying and conflict and how to 
respond to each  
● Understand the role school staff play in preventing bullying   
● Learn about culturally and linguistically sustaining practices 


Page 40:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 40 of 44 
 
that lead to spaces that feel safe, welcoming and are 
inclusive   
● Understand how adult bias and micro-aggression impact 
staff’s ability to effectively develop relationships with 
students involved in bullying   
● Develop an awareness of suicide and suicide prevention 
resources 
● Understand the unique way bullying impacts LGBTQ+ and 
ELL students and students with disabilities  
○ Become familiar with FAPE and IDEA as they relate to 
bullying  
● Develop strategies to empower bystanders   
● Learn to differentiate bullying and bias-based speech and 
behavior  
● Learn best practices to address bullying   
● Listening and talking to families with empathy 
● Become familiar with resources to develop and implement 
school-based programs. 
● Develop plans for family workshops  
 
 


Page 41:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 41 of 44 
 
ATTACHMENT 3: 
SAFE SPACE AND BULLYING PREVENTION REPORTING 
FORM - Boston Public Schools 
1. Name of the person reporting this bullying allegation. 
Write "NA" if you want to report anonymously. Note, 
no disciplinary action will be taken solely on the basis 
of an anonymous report. 
2. Phone number of the person reporting this bullying 
allegation. Write "NA" to remain anonymous 
3. Who is reporting this bullying allegation? 
○ I'm a student reporting for myself 
○ I'm a student reporting for another student 
○ I'm a family member/caregiver reporting on 
behalf of my child 
○ I'm a school staff member (admin, educators, 
support staff, etc.) reporting for a student 
4. Name and email of person completing this form (if 
different than above): Write "NA" if not relevant.  
5. Role of person completing this form (if different than 
above) 
○ Bullying Hotline Staff (Succeed Boston staff only) 
○ BPS Help Line Staff 
○ School Staff member 


Page 42:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 42 of 44 
 
○ NA 
6. Have you already reported this incident to the school 
leader? 
○ Yes 
○ No 
7. Name of alleged target: 
8. Student ID# of alleged target: (Please put 0 if 
unknown) 
9. School of alleged target: 
10. Grade of alleged target: 
11. Does the alleged target receive special education 
services?   
○ Yes 
○ No 
○ Unsure 
12. Name and grade of the alleged aggressor(s): (If the 
alleged aggressor is an adult, please indicate) 
13. Do any alleged aggressor(s) attend a different school? 
If yes, please type the name of the school(s) below. (If 
not, please write "NA") 
14. Date, time, and location of incident(s): (If not known, 
please write "NA") 


Page 43:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 43 of 44 
 
 
15. If the incident occurred on a school bus, please list 
the bus number below: (If not on a bus, please write 
"NA") 
16. Describe the incident, including names, details of 
what happened, and specific words used. You may 
send additional evidence (i.e., video, screenshots, 
emails) to saws@bostonpublicschools.org. 
17. Witnesses: List the names of any people who saw the 
incident or may have information about it: (If none, 
please write "NA") 
18. Does this bullying allegation involve bias-based 
speech or behavior? “Bias-based” bullying, including 
cyberbullying or harassment, is when a person is 
bullied because of membership in, or perceived 
membership in, a protected class. Protected classes: 
race, color, age, physical or mental disability, 
pregnancy and pregnancy-related conditions, 
criminal record, homelessness, sex/gender, gender 
identity, religion, national origin, ancestry, sexual 
orientation, genetics, natural or protective hairstyle, 
socioeconomics, and retaliation. Please note: All 
investigations involving bias-based speech or 
behavior will be forwarded to the Office of Equity by 
Succeed Boston. 
○ Yes 
○ No 


Page 44:
 
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-18 
Page 44 of 44 
 
19. Are you concerned for the student's safety? 
○ Yes  
○ No 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SSS-07 
Version 01 
 
 
 
 
“PERSISTENTLY DANGEROUS” SCHOOLS –  
STANDARDS FOR DETERMINATION 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version 
 
BACKGROUND  
Section 9532 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
(ESEA), as amended by the Every Student Succeeds Act of 2015 
(ESSA) states: 
Each State receiving funds under this chapter shall establish 
and implement a statewide policy requiring that a student 
attending a persistently dangerous public elementary 
school or secondary school, as determined by the State in 
consultation with a representative sample of local 
educational agencies, or who becomes a victim of a violent 
criminal offense, as determined by State law, while in or on 
the grounds of a public elementary school or secondary 
school that the student attends, be allowed to attend a safe 
public elementary school or secondary school within the 
local educational agency, including a public charter school. 
20 U.S.C. § 7912. 
  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-07 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 
STANDARDS 
The Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education, at a meeting of the State Board of Education on 
March 25, 2003, established the standards to determine an 
“unsafe” or “persistently dangerous” school. A school may be 
deemed unsafe either as a whole entity or for an individual 
student who becomes a victim of a violent criminal offense. 
These standards were implemented as of July 1, 2003. Following 
are the standards for (1) individual students and (2) the whole 
school determination. 
 
INDIVIDUAL STUDENT OPTION 
Beginning in the 2003/2004 school year, any student who during 
school hours becomes a victim of a “violent criminal offense” (as 
defined by Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 140, Section 121) 
which takes place in or on the grounds of a public elementary or 
secondary school that the student attends must be allowed, to 
the extent feasible, to transfer immediately to another public 
school within the school district. For purposes of this policy, “in or 
on the grounds” of the school includes school premises, school 
buses, and attendance at school sponsored or school related 
events including athletic games and field trips.  
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-07 
Page 3 of 6 
 
 
 
WHOLE SCHOOL OPTION 
To be designated as “persistently dangerous,” a school must 
meet either of the following criteria for three consecutive years 
beginning with the most recent enrollment data available to the 
Department, as well as the prior two years: 
 
• One or more students have been expelled for violation of 
the Federal Gun-Free Schools Act, v.z. Section 7.3.1. of the 
BPS Code of Discipline (October 2006 ed), or; 
 
• The number of students who have been expelled from 
school for a period greater than 45 days under Mass. 
General Laws Chapter 71, Section 37H for weapons or 
physical assaults or for violent crimes as defined by Mass. 
General Laws Chapter 140, Section 121 exceeds 1.5% of the 
student enrollment. The rate will be based on each 
individual school’s enrollment data submitted to the 
Department (i.e., October Report). 
 
Students who qualify for a safety transfer under either of the 
aforementioned options will be transferred through the safety 
transfer process (Superintendent’s Circular AMT-07, Safety 
Transfer Request Procedures). Documentation of a “violent 
criminal offense” must be attached to the safety transfer request 
form in the case of a single student option request. It is 
anticipated that the Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education (DESE) will designate schools as “persistently 
dangerous” based on the aforementioned criteria prior to the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-07 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 
start of school each year. Such a designation will be forwarded 
directly to the superintendent by the Massachusetts Department 
of Elementary and Secondary Education. 
 
REMEDIAL ACTION 
For any school that meets either standard for a “persistently 
dangerous “ school designation for two consecutive years, 
DESE will request that the school and district evaluate their needs 
and adopt or revise a corrective action plan to ensure a safe school 
environment for all students and staff. The school and district shall 
maintain the corrective action plan as a public record. To the 
extent feasible, DESE will provide technical assistance to the 
school and district. 
 
For any school that meets either standard for a “persistently 
dangerous “ school designation for three consecutive years, 
DESE will designate the school as “persistently dangerous.” 
Parents may then exercise their right to have their child attend a 
safe public elementary or secondary school within the local 
educational agency (school district). The school will be required to 
submit a corrective action plan to DESE. To the extent feasible, 
DESE will collaborate with other state and local agencies to 
provide support and technical assistance to the school and 
district. 
If DESE notifies a school or district that the school is or may be 
designated as “persistently dangerous,” school officials will have 
ten working days to present information to DESE that may have a 
bearing on the designation. The local officials’ response may 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-07 
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
include any or all of the following: 
 
1. Clarification of the disciplinary incident data submitted 
2. The school’s safety plan 
3. Local efforts to address the school’s safety concerns 
4. The school safety data reported to the state consistent with 
requirements of ESEA, Title IVA 
5. Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act, section 
4112 (c) (3) 
6. More current data that the school may have available 
7. Any extenuating circumstances 
8. Any other information the school officials believe may be 
relevant  
 
The Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education will review the information provided by the school 
officials before making a final determination. 
It is important to note that failure to transfer a student in a timely 
manner as required by the law and the Massachusetts 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education could result 
in the loss of federal funds. 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-07 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Deputy Superintendent of Operations 
Department: 
Deputy Superintendent of Operations 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9643 
E-mail: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SSS-19 
Version 01 
 
 
 
HOME AND HOSPITAL INSTRUCTION SERVICES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version 
            
 
POLICY 
The intent of Boston Public Schools (BPS) Home and Hospital 
Instruction is to provide a student receiving a publicly funded 
education with the opportunity to make educational progress 
even when a physician determines that the student is medically 
unable to attend school. In compliance with Massachusetts 
regulation 603 CMR 28.03(3), BPS Home and Hospital Instruction 
collaborates with schools, parents, agencies, and hospitals to 
ensure alignment of educational goals and curriculum for 
accurate service delivery to provide, at a minimum, the 
instruction necessary to enable the student to maintain progress 
in their courses of study and minimize the educational loss that 
might occur during the period when the student is confined at 
home or in a hospital. Services are provided with sufficient 
frequency to allow the student to continue their educational 
program, as long as such services do not interfere with the 
medical needs of the student.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-19 
Page 2 of 13 
 
 
 
INTENT OF MASSACHUSETTS REGULATIONS ON EDUCATIONAL 
SERVICES IN THE HOME OR HOSPITAL 
Home and Hospital Instruction is not to be confused with Special 
Education services, “unless the student has been determined 
eligible for such services, and the services include services on the 
student’s IEP.” Home and Hospital Instruction is a special type of 
service provided under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) 
and state law for the purpose of ensuring that medically involved 
students receiving a publicly funded education have equal access 
to education as do their counterparts. Publicly funded education 
includes Boston Public Schools, charter schools, Boston resident 
students who are enrolled at out of district schools, including 
METCO and private placements, and students on private tuition 
(see Attachment B). Students who are on private tuition are 
eligible only if they have an Individualized Education Program 
(IEP) or fall under the special education umbrella. 
The eligibility guidelines of Home and Hospital Instruction are: 
● A physician determines that a student is physically unable 
to attend school. 
● A student has been or will be out of school for more than 14 
consecutive days or can be anticipated to accumulate more 
than 14 absences in a school year at home or in a hospital 
(i.e., sickle cell disease, cancer treatment, etc.).  
● When it is deemed by the student’s attending physician or 
pediatrician that they will be confined to a home or hospital 
setting for more than 60 (sixty) days, the student will then 
be evaluated by the Special Education Department under 
state guideline/regulation 603 CMR 28.04(4). When it is 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-19 
Page 3 of 13 
 
 
 
known that a student will be out for more than 60 (sixty) 
days, it is recommended that the physician complete the 60 
Day Physician Statement. 
● A student is marked Constructively Present (CP) for the 
period during which the student receives home/hospital-
based services and receives a passing grade for all work that 
has been satisfactorily completed. No home/hospital-based 
instruction will be provided over the summer break unless 
designated in an IEP and the child is unable to attend 
Extended School Year. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF HOME AND HOSPITAL INSTRUCTION 
Role of the parent: 
● Provide consent for the exchange of information between 
the student's physician and the district to ensure an open 
line of communication between service providers.  
● Maintain communication with the school to ensure that 
grading is occurring according to classroom guidelines. 
● Inform school of the student’s medical needs that will 
require home and hospital instruction. 
● Provide the school nurse with all the medical information to 
ensure that when the student is in school, the medications, 
procedures, and protocols are in place to ensure medical 
safety and optimal learning. This includes completing, along 
with the physician of record, the Individual Collaborative 
Health Plan (ICHP) form if the physician indicates that the 
student’s health during this period will affect the provision 
of full educational services and this form has not previously 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-19 
Page 4 of 13 
 
 
 
been completed. 
● Ensure that the student’s physician of record completes the 
Home and Hospital Physician Statement form and the ICHP. 
● Participate in the action plan for their child based on the 
ICHP and the Physician Statement. 
● Provide an appropriate learning environment at home. 
● Ensure that someone over the age of 18 is at home when the 
tutoring occurs (or arranges a neutral meeting place such as 
a library), notify the central office if the tutor does not keep 
the appointment, and sign the instructor’s sheet after each 
session. 
Role of the physician: 
● Submits a completed Physician Statement (see Attachment 
A) verifying the medical or psychological illness to the 
school’s nurse for verification. When it is known that a 
student will be out for more than 60 days, it is 
recommended that the physician complete the 60 Day 
Physician Statement. 
The Physician Statement should include the date the 
student will be confined, medical diagnosis, expected return 
date, and medical information that may prevent the student 
from accessing the provision of a full education.   
● If the physician identifies on the Physician Statement that 
the student’s health during this period will affect the 
provision of full educational services, the physician needs to 
complete the ICHP in conjunction with the parent. 
● The physician is expected to remain aware of the time frame 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-19 
Page 5 of 13 
 
 
 
the child is out of school. 
● Participate in a re-entry plan to ensure the child can return 
to the school environment without impediments. 
ROLE OF THE SCHOOL ADMINISTRATOR: 
● Identifies a person to be the school contact (i.e., guidance 
counselor, student support staff, nurse, or administrator) 
who will serve as a liaison for students who are home and 
hospital bound. 
● Submit the designated point of contact to the Home and 
Hospital Instruction Program within the Department of 
Opportunity Youth (OY). 
● If needed, refer a school-based teacher to Home and 
Hospital Instruction to serve as the home tutor.  
● Ensure appropriate school-level communications to prompt 
a timely N1 team meeting with special education for 
students who will be out for more than 60 days. 
● Oversee the coordination of key school staff to ensure 
students in Home and Hospital Instruction have school-
based support in the areas of academics, curriculum, 
attendance, and testing as appropriate and necessary.  
Role of the school nurse: 
● The school nurse reviews and submits the completed 
Physician’s Statement form and non-BPS student form to 
Home and Hospital Instruction (617-635-6633) for 
coordination of services. 
● Communicate with the Home and Hospital Instruction team 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-19 
Page 6 of 13 
 
 
 
as needed to ensure students have appropriate access to 
services and tutoring. 
● Coordinate with the physician or medical provider as 
needed to confirm, verify, or request updates to information 
in Physician Statement. 
● Collaborate with the school-based and Special Education 
team to ensure appropriate support of the student’s 
academic goals while in Home and Hospital Instruction. 
● Request a medical update from the physician after 2 
months if the student still needs home tutoring. 
● When it is known that a student will be out for more than 60 
days, it is recommended that the school nurse coordinate 
with the family and/or medical provider to ensure that the 
physician completes the 60 Day Physician Statement. 
Role of the teacher: 
● Ensure that the student follows the same classroom syllabus 
and rubric as the non-medically involved students. 
● Modify home and hospital assignments as needed so the 
student can continue to make academic progress. 
● Correct the work and assign appropriate grades to the 
student. 
● Notify parents of the student’s progress. 
Role of the identified school-based contact to Home and 
Hospital Instruction: 
● Determine if online curriculum is appropriate and posts 
online.  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-19 
Page 7 of 13 
 
 
 
● Collect materials/assignments from the student’s teachers 
for the home and hospital instructors. 
● If students are hospitalized, the school contact provides 
materials/assignments to parents.  Work can also be faxed 
or emailed to the hospital instructors. 
● If a student is homebound, the school contact provides 
materials/assignments to the home instructors. 
● Communicate frequently with the Home & Hospital 
Instruction Program, home-based instructors, students, and 
parents to assure continuity of services and that student 
needs are being met. 
● Receive completed work from the home or hospital 
instructors and deliver the work to the student’s teachers. 
● Ensure students are not being marked absent but as 
Constructively Present (CP). Students’ attendance should 
reflect “Home Tutoring” as the “reason code” to avoid “did 
not report’ (DNR) and automatic withdrawal from school. 
● Ensure grades are entered and report cards are generated. 
● Sign off on home instructor timesheet once monthly. 
● Retain copy of scholastic and attendance records. 
● Work with the Office of Special Education to assure qualified 
students are evaluated for an IEP or 504 plan. 
Role of Home and Hospital Instruction: 
● Oversee the Home and Hospital Instruction program, 
including tutor recruitment, application, assignment, 
payment, and training. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-19 
Page 8 of 13 
 
 
 
● Identify tutoring vendors in conjunction with the hospital. 
● Identify a home instructor once eligibility is confirmed. 
● Maintain a tracking system of all students receiving Home 
and Hospital Instruction. 
● Provide training on protocol and procedures to all Home 
and Hospital instructors. 
● Perform quality assurance monitoring, which can include 
random visits to tutoring sites. 
● Assist schools in academic advising. 
● Determine, in conjunction with the school, the family and 
the medical needs, the length and frequency of tutoring 
sessions. In general, the length should not exceed 3 hours in 
one sitting, and the frequency is generally 3 times per week, 
with a range of 2- 10 hours. 
Role of the Home and Hospital instructors: 
● Participate in the Home and Hospital Instruction training 
program and review/implement the Protocol and Procedure 
Manual for Home Instructors. 
● Confirm tutoring assignments with the school within 24 
hours of receipt. 
● Maintain communication with the school’s designated 
school-based contact person. 
● Complete scholastic records on individual students. 
● Maintain a timesheet with daily parental sign-off.   
● Provide direct tutorial services on an individualized basis to 
assigned students. 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-19 
Page 9 of 13 
 
 
 
● Arrange designated material pick-up times with the school’s 
contact. 
● Schedule tutoring sessions with parents. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 443 Warren Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-19 
Page 10 of 13 
 
 
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-19 
Page 11 of 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-19 
Page 12 of 13 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENT B 
This form is to be completed by the school on Non-BPS students: 
Private, Charter, Out of District, Private Placement and METCO 
This student is currently receiving hospital/home tutorial services 
through Boston Public Schools.  In addition to the Physician’s 
Statement (form 603 CMR 28.3(3)c), please submit the following 
information for the referred student: 
 
Student Name: ___________________________________________________  
Address: __________________________________________________________  
Parent/Guardian: _________________________________________________  
Telephone: Home______________________Cell ______________________  
Date of Birth:     ___________________________________________________  
Race:  ____________________________________________________________  
M______   F______ Grade: ____________ 
School Name: ____________________________________________________  
School Address: __________________________________________________  
School Phone: ____________________________________________________  
School Contact: __________________________________________________  
Email Address:  ___________________________________________________  
FAX #: _____________________________ 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-19 
Page 13 of 13 
 
 
 
Is the student receiving special education services?  
Yes____ No_____ Unknown ______ 
  
Please return this form to: 
Home and Hospital Program Coordinator  
Boston Public School, Home and Hospital Instruction 
443 Warren Street, Dorchester, MA 02121, Suite #2 
or email to: Operations-Department Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
Contact Information:  
Office 617-635-6633       
FAX 617-635-6635 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SSS-09 
Version 01 
 
 
 
EMPLOYMENT PERMIT APPLICATIONS AND ISSUANCE 
OF WORK PERMITS FOR STUDENTS AGES 14 
THROUGH 17 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version 
 
During the school year, all Boston Public School students 
requiring working papers (employment permits and educational 
certificates) will obtain such from guidance counselors or 
designated staff in their individual schools. 
• Guidance counselors will supervise the issuance of working 
papers, but the secretary designated by the principal or 
head of school will perform the clerical process of issuing 
the papers. 
• Principals and heads of school will determine the time that 
the secretary will perform this function. 
• Occasionally, exceptional circumstances (e.g., heavy 
workload, unscheduled assignments) occur, making it 
impossible for the secretary to perform this task. During 
those times, the guidance counselor will process working 
papers. 
Charter schools are public schools.  Charter school students will 
obtain the employment permit from their school staff. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-09 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
 
Parochial, private, and METCO school students who are residents 
of Boston will obtain the required permits/certificates through 
the Welcome Centers of the Boston Public Schools using the 
online process located on the BPS website 
www.bostonpublicschools.org.  Boston Public School students 
can also obtain their permits/certificates using the online process 
located on the Boston Public Schools website 
www.bostonpublicschools.org when their school is not in session 
(e.g., summer months, school vacations, etc.). 
 
PROCEDURE 
All students under the age of 18 must obtain a work permit 
before starting a new job per Massachusetts General Laws, 
Chapter 149, Sections 86-89. 
The following process must be followed as outlined in the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Employment Permit 
Application for 14 through 17-year-olds. 
1. All students must obtain a Promise of Employment. 
2. The employer must complete the Promise of Employment 
section and sign off on it. 
3. ONLY 14 and 15-year-olds must obtain a signed physician’s 
certificate of health. 
4. All students must have their parent/guardian sign the 
permit application. 
5. The student must also sign the permit application. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-09 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
 
6. When the permit application is completed, it should be 
returned to the school guidance 
7. counselor or the school designee.  
 
The school staff will verify the date of birth and issue a work 
permit. The employment permit application will be kept on file. If 
it is during non-school periods, or the student does not attend a 
Boston Public School, but is a resident of Boston, the student will 
utilize the BPS online Youth Work Permit Request form located 
on the website www.bostonpublicschools.org.  Proof of the 
student's age, such as a birth certificate, passport, immunization 
record, etc., should be provided. An employment permit will then 
be issued. 
Please note that a work permit may not be issued to a parent. 
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 149, Section 89 requires 
that the child appear in person with proper identification. 
According to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
(https://www.mass.gov/service-details/youth-employment-
permit-information): all teens under 18 years of age must 
complete a work permit application and get a work permit 
before starting a new job. Please see the complete summary of 
the Massachusetts laws regulating child labor for further 
information. 
With very limited exceptions, minors under the age of 14 may not 
work. All minors under the age of 18 must complete an 
employment permit application and get their permit before 
starting a new job. You can download Youth Employment Permit 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SSS-09 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
 
Application and Youth Permit Process. You can also access these 
forms in Spanish, Portuguese, Chinese, and Vietnamese. 
FORMS 
1. Employment permit applications can be found and printed 
at https://www.mass.gov/service-details/youth-
employment-permit-information 
2. When school is not in session, please complete this form 
and upload the required documents.  Once completed, a 
BPS Welcome Services team member will contact you 
within two business days regarding the next steps for your 
work permit. Parochial, private and METCO school students 
that are Boston residents may utilize this form during the 
entire year. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Director of Guidance, Office of Schools & 
Accountability 
Department: Guidance Services, Office of Schools & 
Accountability 
Mailing 
Address: 
443 Warren Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8030 
E-mail: 
cchiu@bostonpublicschools.org; Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
COM-02 
Version 01 
 
 
MEDIA RELATIONS POLICY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to cultivating and 
maintaining an open and productive relationship with the news 
media. The district recognizes that the media provides a public 
service, are viewed as a reliable source of news about the Boston 
Public Schools and seeks to provide timely and accurate 
information toward that end. 
The district maintains that the top priority of schools is to 
educate students and ensure the safety and privacy of all 
students, staff, and families. 
 To balance the responsibilities of schools and the need to provide 
information to the media, all press inquiries about the Boston 
Public Schools or any individual school, student, staff member, 
program, or initiative are to be directed first to the 
Communications Office. 
 Any staff member contacted directly by a member of the news 
media must refer the reporter to the Communications Office, 
who will work with staff and the media outlet to respond 
appropriately to the inquiry. 
 District officials, schools, and staff must cooperate with the news 
media to the extent required and appropriate by law while 
ensuring that media coverage does not interfere with teaching 
and learning. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular COM-02 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 It is critically important to protect the privacy of students and 
staff while fulfilling the requirements of public records laws. The 
Communications Office works closely with the Legal Advisor to 
determine what information is a matter of public record and 
what must remain confidential. Only a student whose parent or 
guardian has signed and returned a Media Appearances form 
may be recorded, filmed, photographed, or interviewed. Students 
for whom no such consent is on file in the school office may not 
participate in any media-related activities, and their name and 
image are not to be released to the media or anyone else outside 
of the school. For more information, see the Guide to the Boston 
Public Schools for Families and Students. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Communications  
Department: 
Chief of Communications 
Mailing 
Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9265 
Email: 
communications@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
COM-01 
Version 01 
 
 
COMMUNICATIONS POLICY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The Boston Public Schools (BPS), Boston School Committee, 
superintendent, and all central and school-based staff are 
responsible for communicating accurately and effectively with 
families, students, colleagues, partners, and the community. 
Ongoing communication with all stakeholders is essential to 
developing and sustaining effective home/school/community 
partnerships for improving student achievement.  
The Boston School Committee affirms the following principles:  
● Families and citizens have a right to know what is occurring 
in their public schools.  
● All BPS employees have an obligation to ensure the public is 
kept systematically and adequately informed.  
● Boston Public Schools staff and families benefit from 
improved sharing of information – positive and negative.   
● Written and verbal communication from schools and 
employees should reflect the BPS commitment to 
supporting all children and families, focusing on student 
achievement through high-quality teaching and learning.  
● Effective communication requires an ongoing two-way 
exchange between schools and constituents, including 


Page 2:
 
Superintendent’s Circular COM-01 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
thoughtful mechanisms at the school and district levels for 
seeking family, student, and community perspectives on 
critical issues and decisions.  
● Language used to communicate with families and the 
community must be free of educational jargon, acronyms, 
and other terminology unfamiliar to non-educators.  
● All communication must reflect and be sensitive to the 
diversity of BPS families and staff, free of bias with respect 
to race, ethnicity, language, education, income, gender, 
religion, sexual orientation, or disability.  
In keeping with these principles, the superintendent shall issue 
district-wide procedures and guidelines to foster effective 
communication in crucial areas such as media relations, 
emergency communications, customer service, publications, 
presentations, photography, events, and 
translation/interpretation.  
To ensure brand consistency and help families identify official 
BPS publications and properties, schools and departments must 
display the BPS logo on websites and publications. School and 
department stationery and signage should incorporate the BPS 
logo, the Boston city seal, or both. The BPS logo may not be 
altered and must be reproduced in its correct aspect ratio. The 
logo digital and printable files are available at the BPS-LOGO 
folder. 
It is the responsibility of every school, office, and program in the 
Boston Public Schools to adhere to these procedures and 
execute additional effective communication strategies. The BPS 
Communications Office shall provide leadership, resources, 
guidance, and technical assistance to support the district and 
schools in these efforts. 


Page 3:
 
Superintendent’s Circular COM-01 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
 
 


Page 4:
 
Superintendent’s Circular COM-01 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
owner:  
Chief of Communications  
Department:  
Chief of Communications 
Mailing Address:  Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone:  
617-635-9265 
Email:  
communications@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
ATH-01 
Version 01 
 
PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT OF SPORTS-RELATED 
HEAD INJURIES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
BACKGROUND 
A concussion is a type of traumatic brain injury caused by a 
bump, blow, or jolt to the head that can affect brain functioning. 
Concussions can also occur from a blow to the body that causes 
the head to move rapidly back and forth. Even a mild bump or 
blow to the head can be serious.  
Concussions can occur in any sport or recreational activity. 
Children who return to play while still experiencing symptoms of 
a concussion are more likely to have another concussion or other 
lasting effects and symptoms. This circular outlines 
responsibilities of all who are involved in athletic participation. It 
includes the following components: 
● Pre-participation examination, including a history of 
previous concussions. 
● Protocols for assessing and managing a child who has a 
concussion on the field. 
● Protocols for returning a child who has had a concussion to 
full participation. 
● Academic assessment and accommodation for a child with 
continued symptoms that interfere with cognitive function 
and academic progress. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-01 
Page 2 of 7 
● Prevention of head injuries and health promotion activities 
that contribute to safe sports participation. 
HEADS OF SCHOOL AND PRINCIPALS SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE 
FOR: 
● Support and enforce the utilization of appropriate protocols, 
required documentation, training, and reporting outlined in 
these procedures. 
● Supervising and reviewing that all documentation is in 
place. 
○ All active coaches must complete the annual 
concussion certification required by the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
COACHES, CERTIFIED ATHLETIC TRAINERS, ATHLETIC 
COORDINATORS, SCHOOL NURSES, AND VOLUNTEERS (EMS, 
SPORTS PHYSICIANS) SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR:  
● Completing the annual educational training on 
identification and management of head trauma. 
● Ensuring and documenting that all students/families have 
submitted: 
○ Updated physical examinations consistent with 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and Massachusetts 
Interscholastic Athletic Association (MIAA) sports 
participation guidelines. 
○ Consents for: participation in athletics, emergency on-
field care, non-emergent injury or illness evaluation 
and associated follow up treatment related to athletics, 
documentation, travel, and medication. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-01 
Page 3 of 7 
○ Completed department pre-participation forms (BPS 
Sports Medical Questionnaire) before participating in 
practice or extracurricular athletic activities. 
○ Commonwealth of Massachusetts head injury form. 
○ An indication that the family has reviewed educational 
materials about concussion. 
● Ensuring that the medical history questionnaire and pre-
participation sports physical form(s) are delivered to the 
school nurse and certified athletic trainer (ATC) in a time 
frame consistent with the sport. The school nurse and 
athletic trainer will discuss any student with a concussion 
history (as indicated by the athlete's primary care physician, 
pre-participation sports physical, or parent history) with 
their coach.  All athletes must be cleared by the school 
nurse and athletic trainer in order to play. 
● Teaching techniques aimed at minimizing sports-related 
head injury: 
○ Discouraging and prohibiting student athletes from 
engaging in any unreasonably dangerous athletic 
technique that endangers the health or safety of a 
student, including using a helmet or any other sports 
equipment as a weapon. 
○ Identifying students with head injuries or suspected 
concussions that occur in play or practice and 
removing them from play, using either:  
■ Coach/volunteer recognition of potential head 
injury 
■ Sideline assessment of concussion evaluation for 
MDs and ATCs.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-01 
Page 4 of 7 
● The results of the evaluation or screening tool must be 
available to the school nurse and parent/guardian, who will 
forward it to the PCP or other designated physician. 
● The coach, athletic trainer, or physician who observed and 
evaluated the concussion shall complete the DPH 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Report of Head Injury 
During Sports Season form and the Department Report of 
Head Injury form and transmit it to the athletic director, the 
parent/guardian, the school nurse, and the athletic trainer. 
● Communicating promptly with the parent/guardian of any 
student removed from play and providing them with 
documentation to bring to the student athlete’s PCP or 
other designated physician.  This documentation must 
include the DPT Commonwealth of Massachusetts Post 
Sports-Related Head injury Medical Clearance and 
Authorization form. This form must be completed by the 
physician and returned to the school nurse and athletic 
trainer. This form will be reviewed by the school nurse or 
athletic trainer and is required before the student athlete is 
allowed to begin a Return to Play protocol. 
● No student can return to play without clearance by the 
school nurse or athletic trainer in consultation with a 
physician per 105 CMR 201.   
● All student athletes who have sustained a concussive event 
must complete a graduated Return to Play protocol unless 
otherwise stipulated by the treating physician, assuring that 
all documentation is in place by conducting an annual 
compliance audit. This includes documentation that all 
students have: 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-01 
Page 5 of 7 
○ pre-participation PEs, consent forms, and 
parent/athlete sign off that concussion information has 
been reviewed. 
○ list of all students with concussion  
○ documentation of follow up for each student with 
concussion; documentation that athlete is cleared to 
play. 
THE SCHOOL NURSE AND ATHLETIC TRAINER WILL BE 
RESPONSIBLE FOR: 
● Completing the required annual educational training on 
concussion: 
○ School nurses will complete the Concussion 
Management in Massachusetts Schools course 
provided by Boston University School Health Institute 
annually. 
● Reviewing any questions raised by the athletic director 
and/or coaches, reviewing all medical questionnaires and 
physical exams.     
● Athletic trainer: Following up with parents/guardians as 
needed prior to the student's participation in extracurricular 
athletic activities. 
● School nurse: Following up with parents/guardians as 
needed prior to the student's participation in classroom 
activities. 
● Maintaining documentation of the medical questionnaire 
and physical in SNAP (the electronic medical record). 
● Maintaining documentation of the head injury assessments 
in the student's health record in the electronic medical 
record. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-01 
Page 6 of 7 
● Ensuring that any student who has experienced a 
concussion or head injury, during sports activities or 
otherwise, provides documentation of medical care and 
proper clearance to return to sports activities using the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Post Concussion 
Clearance Form. 
● Participating in the graduated reentry planning meeting for 
students who have been diagnosed with a concussion to 
discuss any necessary accommodations or modifications 
with respect to academics, course requirements, homework, 
testing, scheduling, and other aspects of school activities 
consistent with a graduated reentry plan for return to full 
academic and extracurricular activities after a head injury 
and revising the health care plan as needed. 
● Presenting appropriate and relevant medical information to 
the service team, on a need-to-know basis maintaining 
student privacy. 
● Monitoring recuperating students with head injuries and 
collaborating with teachers and coaches to ensure that the 
graduated reentry plan for return to full academic and 
extracurricular activities. 
● Providing beginning of school year review of concussions as 
well as ongoing educational materials on head injury and 
concussion to teachers, staff, and students. 
 
 
PARENTS/STUDENTS SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR: 
● Ensuring that the child has:   
a. A valid up to date pre-participation physical 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-01 
Page 7 of 7 
b. A completed sports medical questionnaire 
c. Completed the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Pre-
Participation Head Injury and Concussion Reporting 
Form for Extracurricular Activities 
● Reviewing concussion materials, including signed 
documentation of the review on the athletic permission 
form. 
● Ensuring that the child with a concussion is evaluated by 
PCP or other appropriate physician even if there has already 
been emergent transport deemed necessary by EMS or AT 
evaluation. 
● Working with the school nurse, athletic trainer, and the 
service team to safely implement return to play guidelines. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Director, Athletics 
Department: 
Athletics Department  
Mailing Address: 
White Stadium, P.O. Box 302205, Jamaica 
Plain, MA 02130 
Phone: 
617-635-8143 
Fax: 
617-635-8147 
Email: 
bpsathletictrainer@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 
 NUMBER: 
ATH-02 
Version 01 
 
 
 
ATHLETIC ELIGIBILITY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
ASPEN/ ELIGIBILITY MANAGEMENT 
ASPEN will be used to manage the students who are interested 
and ultimately participate in athletics each season.  The students 
and sports they are participating in should be accurate in ASPEN 
at the start of each season.  Key personnel (athletic coordinator, 
nurse, school admin) at the school level will have the ability to see 
the seasonal list of participating students and the current 
eligibility status.  Athletic coordinators, athletic trainers, school 
nurses, and coaches should communicate regularly to ensure 
that ASPEN accurately reflects who is participating on each team. 
The ASPEN sign-up period will open 8 weeks prior to the start of 
the season. The sign-up period in ASPEN will close 14 days after 
the start of the season. Athletes who start within the 14-day 
window must have a minimum of 5 days of practice prior to 
being allowed to participate in a game competition. Using the 
labels provided, each student in ASPEN should be identified as 
follows: 
Aspen Athletic Eligibility Status Definitions 
• INTEREST: defined as “Student identifies interest” — 
completes sign-up in ASPEN 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 2 of 12 
 
 
 
• ACTIVE:  defined as “Waiting on student”; i.e., turn in ALL 
required documentation known as the BPS Athletic 
Participation Forms, copy of a valid 13-month physical exam 
to the athletic trainer (or school nurse if athletic trainer not 
available), and tryout status 
• ACTION REQUIRED: defined as “Call to action”; 
School/Athletic Department submit MIAA waivers/forms 
where applicable 
• INELIGIBLE: defined as “Does not meet baseline eligibility 
requirements”; i.e., valid 13-month physical exam on file as 
documented in ASPEN, does not meet academic 
enrollment, attendance, or GPA requirements 
• PENDING: defined as “Awaiting decision from a higher 
authority”; i.e., MIAA waiver/approval, BPS Athletic 
Department, school principal/head of school or designee to 
review student academic eligibility 
• ELIGIBLE: defined as “Meets ALL eligibility requirements” for 
participation and has MIAA approvals on record with the 
BPS Athletic Department 
• INACTIVE: defined as a “no show,” “not participating,” or “did 
not make the team after tryouts.” 
 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
Athletic Coordinator 
Will serve as the athletics liaison and primary contact at the 
school for the Athletics Department and coaches to support 
athletics.  The athletic coordinator will be responsible for student-
athlete eligibility in collaboration with coaches, athletic trainers, 
school nurses, and school leadership.   


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 3 of 12 
 
 
 
Head Coach and Assistant Coaches 
Must be knowledgeable of the MIAA eligibility rules and 
regulations.  As interest lists and teams are being organized, 
coaches must communicate any eligibility concerns to their 
athletic coordinator so they are resolved prior to the start of the 
season and practice. 
Athletic Department Staff 
Will support schools through the eligibility/waiver process and 
serve as a liaison between the schools and the MIAA.  Athletics 
Department staff will schedule meetings prior to the start of each 
season with athletic coordinators, athletic trainers, and school 
nurses (if necessary/indicated) and support staff to review 
student-athlete eligibility.  Athletic department staff will maintain 
Aspen functionality and advise/teach athletic training staff 
necessary operations of the Aspen system for their needs 
Athletic Trainers 
Athletic trainers are responsible for the primary review of athletic 
physicals and determining the date(s) of valid pre-participation 
physical examination (PPE) and athlete eligibility based on 
having an up-to-date PPE on file.  Athletic trainers will route all 
PPE obtained from student-athletes to the school nurse to place 
in the student-athletes file.  Athletic trainers will provide coaches 
with a list of all athletes who have a valid, up-to-date PPE and are 
deemed eligible to play.   
 
Head of School/Principal 
Must be aware of and officially sign off on eligibility and rosters 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 4 of 12 
 
 
 
for teams each season.  When needed, school leaders must 
support and sign off on any MIAA or BPS eligibility waiver 
requests.  New heads of school are required to attend an MIAA 
rules workshop. 
SUMMARY OF HIGH SCHOOL INTERSCHOLASTIC ELIGIBILITY 
• 1.67 or higher GPA (schools may choose to have a higher 
GPA for athletic participation) 
• Must pass four (4) core classes 
• School attendance rate of 90% or higher (aligned with 
current BPS Attendance Policy) 
• A physical examination completed within the last 13 months 
stating that the student-athlete is or is not cleared for 
athletics that does not expire before the end of the season, 
with sports clearance from the r athletic trainer and/or 
school nurse 
• Students who turn 19 before September 1 of the current 
academic year are ineligible unless an age waiver is granted 
by the MIAA. 
SUMMARY OF MIDDLE-LEVEL ELIGIBILITY 
• 2.0 or higher GPA (schools may choose to have a higher GPA 
for athletic participation) 
• School attendance rate of 90% or higher  (aligned with 
current BPS Attendance Policy) 
• A physical examination completed within the last 13 months 
stating that the student-athlete is or is cleared for athletics 
that does not expire before the end of the season, with 
verification from the school nurse or athletic trainer and/or 
school nurse 
• Students who turn 15 before September 1 of the current 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 5 of 12 
 
 
 
academic year are ineligible to compete. 
• Yearly signed parental consent forms (transferable season to 
season) 
DETAILED OVERVIEW OF HIGH SCHOOL INTERSCHOLASTIC/ 
MIAA ATHLETICS 
 
Season 
Start Date 
Fall Sports 
3rd Friday in August (Football Aug 18) 
Winter Sports 
1st Monday after Thanksgiving (November 27) 
Spring Sports 
Third Monday of March (March 18, 2024) 
 
Participating student-athletes must meet the following criteria 
for eligibility each season.   
 
1) Age (Rule #60) 
a) A student shall be under 19 years of age but may 
compete during the remainder of the school year, 
provided that their birthday occurs on or after 
September 1 of that year. 
 
2) Transfer Students (Rule #57) 
a) A student who transfers from any school to an MIAA 
member HS is ineligible to participate in any 
interscholastic athletic contest at any level for a period 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 6 of 12 
 
 
 
of one year in all sports in which that student 
participated at the varsity level or its equivalent during 
the one-year period immediately preceding the 
transfer. 
i) 
Note: MIAA Form 200 may be executed between 
the receiving and sending school principals of 
MIAA member schools only. 
ii) 
All Form 200s must be submitted to the Athletics 
Department and MIAA Office for their records. 
b) Reason for Transfer 
i) 
Exemption to the transfer rule: When a student’s 
school transfer is necessitated (i.e., required) by a 
change of residence of their parent(s) to the area 
served by the school to which they transfer.  
ii) 
This exception does not apply to a change in 
custody, guardianship, or to a student’s change in 
residence from one parent to another, nor does it 
apply when the student could continue to attend 
the former school. 
3) Date entered school (MIAA Rule #51) 
a) Student-athletes must be enrolled in the school at the 
start of the season to be eligible to participate in 
athletics. 
b) This can be appealed with an MIAA waiver. 
4) Student Eligibility: Membership in School (MIAA Rule #55) 
a) A student shall have been a member of the MIAA 
member secondary school for a minimum of two 
months (exclusive of the Summer vacation).  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 7 of 12 
 
 
 
5) Years of Eligibility 
a) When a student enters 9th grade, they are eligible for 
only four years. 
b) A student shall be eligible for interscholastic 
competition for no more than 12 consecutive athletic 
seasons after first entering grade 9. 
c) A waiver can be requested for an additional year of 
eligibility if there is an extenuating circumstance 
involved. 
6) Grade Point Average (GPA) and Transcripts (MIAA Rule #58) 
a) BPS requires that all students must have a cumulative 
GPA of 1.67 (or higher) to be eligible to participate in 
interscholastic athletics.   
b) During the last marking period preceding the contest 
(e.g., second-quarter marks and not semester grades 
determine third quarter eligibility), a passing grade in 
the equivalent of four major subjects 
c) To satisfy this requirement, a student must have 
passed sufficient courses for that marking period 
which carry Carnegie Units totaling the equivalent of 
four traditional 1-year major English courses. 
d) Full-Time Student:  A student cannot at any time 
represent a school unless that student is taking 
courses that would provide Carnegie Units equivalent 
to four traditional 1-year major English courses. 
e) To be eligible for the Fall marking period, students are 
required to have passed for the previous academic year 
the equivalent of four traditional 1-year major English 
courses. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 8 of 12 
 
 
 
i) 
Incomplete grades may not be counted toward 
eligibility until they are made up following school 
policy 
ii) 
A student who repeats work in which they have 
once received credit cannot count that subject a 
second time for eligibility. 
iii) 
A student cannot count for eligibility for any 
subject taken during the summer vacation unless 
that subject has been pursued and failed during 
the preceding academic year. 
 
7) Boston Public Schools Athletic Programs Consent for 
Participation Forms: 
a) BPS Athletic Programs Consent for Participation Forms 
must be completed and on file prior to any student-
athlete being allowed to participate or play for any BPS 
Athletic Team 
b) All BPS Athletic Programs Consent for Participation 
Forms will be sent to the parent/guardian of the 
student-athlete after completion of ASPEN registration. 
These forms will be distributed via DocuSign and will 
be distributed to ATC for review with the school 
athletic coordinator. These forms only need to be 
completed once per school year. The BPS Athletic 
Programs Consent for Participation Forms will consist 
of the following required forms: 
i) 
Parent/Guardian Consent Form 
ii) 
Acknowledgment of MIAA: 
(1) MIAA Rule 57: Student Eligibility: Transfer 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 9 of 12 
 
 
 
Students 
(2) MIAA Rule 59: Student Eligibility: Time 
Allowed for participation post 9th grade 
enrollment 
(3) MIAA Diversity Equity and Inclusion Pledge 
(new Nov 2022) 
iii) 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts - Chapter 269 
Section 17: Anti-Hazing Law 
iv) 
Hold Harmless Agreement 
v) 
Concussion Awareness 
vi) 
Upload - current physical examination for review 
by ATC 
vii) 
Media Appearances 
viii) 
DPH Head Injury Form 
ix) 
MGB Athletic Training Services Agreement 
 
8) Physical Exam (MIAA Rule #56)  
a) Participating students must have a valid physical or 
pre-participation examination (PPE) completed within 
the last 13 months.  
b) Physicals or PPE forms must have a statement that 
clears the student for athletic/sports 
c) Physicals or PPE must be completed and on file with 
BPS Athletics in Aspen prior to any student-athlete 
being allowed to practice or play for any BPS Athletic 
Team. 
d) Physicals or PPEs must be valid and on file for the 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 10 of 12 
 
 
 
entire athletic seasons 
e) Physicals or PPEs must include the date of the 
examination, physician's signature (electronic or 
actual), and wording that states that the student-
athlete is cleared for athletics or sports competition 
 
9) Enrollment/ Attendance 
a) Attendance for the term prior to the season must be 
90% or higher 
b) Students are ineligible to practice or compete if they 
are not in school for more than half of the school day. 
c) For a student to practice with or to represent a MIAA 
member school in an athletic competition, the student 
must be duly enrolled in that school (#51). Also, a 
student shall have been a member of the MIAA 
member secondary school for a minimum of two 
months (exclusive of the Summer vacation) and have 
been issued a report card preceding the contest unless 
entering from an elementary or junior high school at 
the start of the school year or transfers in from another 
school. (MIAA Rule #55.1) 
 
10) 
MIAA Waiver Request Process 
a) All “Form 200s” must be sent to the MIAA office so that 
all transfers are on file. 
b) Student Waiver of Athletic Eligibility waivers must 
include the following: 
i) 
A letter of support from the Principal/AD/School 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 11 of 12 
 
 
 
Administrator addressing the four standards of 
rule 87.5. 
ii) 
Transcripts from every year since first entering 
Grade 9 (including current grades) 
iii) 
Current school year attendance records 
iv) 
Comprehensive athletic resume (now included in 
application) 
v) 
League or District Advisory Vote 
vi) 
Form 200 (if applicable) 
c) The third standard, which must be addressed during a 
waiver application, was changed to “address how this 
waiver will impact the home school student body.” The 
new language captures the overall impact the waiver 
will have on the home school student body. 
d) A new section was added to Rule 87 titled 
“Accountability.” This details the process in the event 
inaccurate or incomplete information is presented 
during the waiver process. 
 
11) 
MIAA Appeals Process  
a) As of Fall 2021, there is only one level of appeal. The 
appeal hearing board will consist of members from 
both the MIAC and ERB. Their decision is final. 
b) The deadlines to submit waivers are as follows: 
i) 
Fall - September 21, 2023 
ii) 
Winter – December 14, 2023 
iii) 
Spring – March 31, 2024 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 12 of 12 
 
 
 
c) Waivers can be submitted after this date, but there will 
be no appeal hearings granted. 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Director, Athletics 
Department: 
Athletics Department  
Mailing 
Address: 
White Stadium 
P.O. Box 302205, Jamaica Plain, MA 02130 
Phone: 
617-635-8143 
Fax: 
617-635-8147 
Email: 
bpsathletictrainer@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
ACA-18 
Version 01 
 
ATTENDANCE AND PUNCTUALITY POLICIES AND 
PROCEDURES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version 
This circular reflects the School Committee’s approved policies 
and procedures for attendance and punctuality. It contains 
detailed guidelines on: 
● Policy background 
● Chronic absenteeism 
● Attendance policy 
● Covid-19 attendance protocols 
● Punctuality policy (tardiness) 
● Recording and maintaining student attendance 
● Recording and following up on DNRs (did not reports) 
● Discharge/withdrawal protocols 
● Notification to parents/caregivers of student absence 
● Notifying parents/caregivers of a missing child 
● Safety concerns related to attendance 
● Approving home & hospital tutoring 
● Procedures for referral to supervisors of attendance 
BACKGROUND AND GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
It is an essential priority of the Boston Public Schools to 
encourage students to maintain consistently high attendance 
rates throughout the school year. Students cannot take full 
advantage of academic and extracurricular opportunities unless 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 2 of 41 
 
 
they are in school consistently. All BPS schools and their School 
Site Councils are expected to implement comprehensive 
prevention and intervention strategies to improve student 
attendance each school year. 
The BPS student attendance policy was approved by the School 
Committee in 1998-1999. It was revised in May 2006 and June 
2007 to include the system-wide prohibition of using cutoff times 
to refuse students’ entry into buildings and the additional 
flexibility for schools to promote and ensure consistently high, 
on-time attendance. It was further revised in 2018 to include 
cultural and religious holidays as an eligible excused absence 
category. In 2021, it was revised to discontinue the policies of 
converting tardies to absences and issuing grades of “No Credit 
(NC)” based on attendance, as well as elevating the importance of 
focusing on chronic absenteeism, where all absences and missed 
instructional time are considered to have a detrimental impact 
on student outcomes.  
On December 10, 2015, the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) 
was signed into law, reauthorizing the federal Elementary and 
Secondary Education Act of 1965 (ESEA). The law includes 
provisions to help ensure improved outcomes for all students 
receiving elementary and secondary education, including the 
following: 
● States must establish high academic content standards, and 
schools must teach all students those standards to help 
prepare them for college and careers. 
● States, districts, and schools must share information with 
families, students, and communities regarding annual 
statewide assessments that measure students' progress 
toward these high standards. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 3 of 41 
 
 
● States and districts must establish systems of support and 
accountability for all schools and provide particular support 
to the lowest-performing schools, schools with low-
performing subgroups, and schools with low graduation 
rates. 
Under ESSA, each state must develop a consolidated state plan 
that documents a comprehensive approach to improving 
outcomes for all students. The Massachusetts Consolidated State 
Plan under the Every Student Succeeds Act, approved in 
September 2017, indicates that the state has included chronic 
absenteeism as one of the accountability index indicators (core 
measures) to be adopted by all schools and school districts. 
Through this policy, each school is given a target goal to reduce 
chronic absenteeism each school year. The BPS Attendance 
Policy described in this document (ACA-18) has been updated to 
reflect changes to the core measures as it relates to attendance 
and chronic absenteeism. 
CHRONIC ABSENTEEISM  
Research recognizes that addressing chronic absenteeism is one 
of the most important priorities in an equitable approach to 
attendance, as chronically absent students are less likely to be 
successful academically and are disproportionately students of 
color. Chronic absenteeism is defined as missing 10 percent or 
more of the school year in any given period. All absences are 
included as it relates to chronic absenteeism, regardless of 
whether the absence is excused or unexcused. For an entire 
school year, a student who misses 18 school days, or about two 
days per month, will be considered chronically absent. Students 
who do not show up to school regularly miss out on fundamental 
learning skills and the chance to build a habit of consistent 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 4 of 41 
 
 
attendance that they can maintain in their post-secondary 
education, their career, and throughout their life.  
Chronic absenteeism significantly increases the likelihood that a 
student will fall off-track academically and struggle to keep pace 
with their peers. Chronic absenteeism in the early grades can 
influence whether a student reads proficiently by the end of the 
third grade; and by the sixth grade, it becomes a leading 
indicator of whether a student will drop out of high school.  
Consistent with the attendance policy is the need to maintain 
accurate, timely, and appropriate records, including information 
on the attendance of students and documentation of reasons for 
absence. Accordingly, all staff must keep accurate records, 
maintain documentation, and communicate with 
parents/caregivers in a timely and effective manner to ensure 
sound school attendance practices. In addition, Boston Public 
Schools is committed to addressing chronic absenteeism 
through prevention and intervention strategies at the school and 
district levels that better support students and families to 
maintain consistently high, on-time attendance. Each school will 
prioritize prevention and intervention strategies that reduce 
chronic student absenteeism.  
The following general principles apply: 
● Schools are required under the law to maintain an accurate 
record of student attendance. 
● Schools at all levels are required to make a concerted effort 
to contact the parent or caregiver each time students are 
absent. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 5 of 41 
 
 
● School leaders bear the final responsibility for attendance in 
their schools and complying with attendance and 
punctuality policies and procedures. 
● External agency support will be sought in those cases where 
school-based meetings do not achieve a positive continuum 
in parental attitude and/or student attendance patterns. 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS ATTENDANCE POLICY 
Attendance: Per the Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education (DESE)’s attendance policy, a student must be at 
school, at a school-related activity, or receiving academic 
instruction for at least half of the school day to be counted as 
present. Students who are not physically present at school but 
receive academic instruction from the district for at least half of 
the school day should be counted as present. Examples of 
academic instruction include tutoring, online learning, or 
distance learning provided by the district. Under this guidance, 
there are limited circumstances in which a student can be 
marked “constructively present.”  
Allowable circumstances to mark a student constructively 
present: 
● Participation in Home & Hospital Instruction 
● Special education school visit 
● Out-of-district special education placement 
● Student is in Department of Youth Services (DYS) custody 
● Succeed Boston (alternative to suspension) 
● College tour or college interview when sponsored by the 
school or approved by the school leader 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 6 of 41 
 
 
Length of Time: A student must attend school for at least a half-
day to be marked “present.” Check with the school leader to 
determine what constitutes a half-day. In most schools, it is: 
3 hours in elementary school 
3 hours and 5 minutes in middle school 
3 hours and 10 minutes in high school 
 
Credit Recovery (No Credit Policy Discontinued): To facilitate 
competency-based grading across the district, the No Credit (NC) 
policy regarding students having three unexcused absences in a 
marking term (four unexcused absences in schools with three 
marking terms) has been discontinued. As a result, schools 
should no longer assign grades of “No Credit (NC)” to students. 
The following guidance has been provided regarding credit 
recovery for students: 
● Passing grades should be competency-based, which may be 
impacted by attendance due to missed assignments or 
schoolwork but should not be tied exclusively to attendance 
or participation. 
● It is essential that schools reach out early and often to 
students at risk of a failing grade. 
● As an alternative, schools may mark a student with an 
“incomplete” grade to enable equitable learning recovery. 
● In all cases, a student not earning a passing grade must be 
given the opportunity and responsibility to equitably 
recover any learning loss or make up the work missed 
within a marking period to earn a passing grade. 
Excused/Unexcused Absences: Certain absences may be 
excused, meaning the absence will not be considered as it relates 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 7 of 41 
 
 
to a referral to truancy court by a supervisor of attendance under 
Massachusetts law (see Massachusetts General Law c.119). 
However, all missed instructional time has the potential to 
negatively impact student outcomes. In addition, all absences are 
included as they relate to chronic absenteeism, regardless of 
whether the absence is excused or unexcused.  
● For an absence to be excused, students must bring in a note 
after each day they are absent.  
● The note must include the date absent, the reason for the 
absence, a phone number where a parent or caregiver can 
be reached, and the parent or caregiver’s signature. 
● Upon return to school, the note must be provided no later 
than seven (7) school days after the absence.  
● Excused absences may include: 
a. An illness or injury that prevents the student from 
attending school. If the illness or hospitalization results in 
absence for three or more consecutive days, a note from a 
health care provider documenting the health problem or 
hospitalization should be attached to the 
parent/caregiver note. Parents/caregivers are not 
expected to have a letter from a health care provider for 
an illness of fewer than three days. The requirement to 
have a letter from a health care provider will not 
supersede specific public health determinations or 
guidance. The school nurse can be consulted regarding 
any questions or changes to this policy based on specific 
circumstances. See COVID-19 Health and Safety Protocol 
for students who exhibit symptoms of COVID-19. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 8 of 41 
 
 
b. A death in the immediate family (parent/caregiver, 
sibling, grandparent, aunt, uncle, cousin) or other 
significant personal or family crisis. 
c. Suspension: Students should be marked as suspended. In 
cases of suspension, the school will provide an 
opportunity for the student to maintain academic 
standing in school by being provided a list of assignments 
and other services which might enable the student to use 
the time out of school productively.  
d. Students assigned to Succeed Boston shall be assigned 
work by the school of assignment and marked 
constructively present.  
e. Court appearances: Students should present evidence of 
the requirement of the court appearance.  
f. Medical or psychological tests during the school day: The 
parent/caregiver must show evidence (such as a note 
from the health center) that the tests could not be 
scheduled after school. 
g. Visits to special education schools in some cases for 
students with disabilities. 
h. Other situations: From time to time, situations over which 
the school, parent/caregiver, and student have little or no 
control may cause absences (for example, transportation 
that does not operate during inclement weather). These 
absences are excusable. The school leader may determine 
that the students impacted shall be marked with an 
excused absence.  
i. Other extraordinary situations, such as a family 
emergency, as approved by the school leader. 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 9 of 41 
 
 
j. Cultural holidays and religious holy days: To 
accommodate students’ cultural and religious 
observances on days when schools are in session, such 
absences will be marked excused with the reason code 
“Religious Holiday” upon submitting a valid note signed 
by a parent or guardian. Please see Superintendent’s 
Circular LGL-06 for more guidance or contact your 
designated supervisor of attendance. The following is a 
list of examples of holidays that are eligible to be excused: 
Diwali, Eid al Adha, Edit al Fitr, Lunar New Year, Orthodox 
Good Friday, Rosh Hashanah, Three Kings Day, and Yom 
Kippur. This is not an exhaustive list, and students may 
request that absences be excused for other cultural 
holidays and religious holy days. Schools should provide 
opportunities for students who are excused to observe 
cultural holidays and religious holy days to submit missed 
assignments or other makeup work for their absence. 
Please contact the Office of Equity, 617-635-9650 or 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org, regarding any concerns 
related to a student absence that is more than two consecutive 
days or is not included on this list. This can include participation 
in a cultural ceremony, bereavement or funeral, pilgrimage, trip, 
etc., that requires students to be absent for more than two days. 
In these instances, a student may be required to meet the 
following criteria to be eligible to be given an excused absence of 
more than two days for observance of a cultural or religious 
holiday or for bereavement to attend a funeral for more than two 
days: 
● The student is not chronically absent, meaning the student 
attended more than 90% of the school days to date.  
● The student is earning a passing grade in all courses.  


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 10 of 41 
 
 
Absences that do not meet the above criteria will be considered 
unexcused. In all instances of student absence, students must be 
given the opportunity to equitably recover any missed work or 
learning loss during a marking period.  
COVID-19 HEALTH AND SAFETY PROTOCOL 
Students, families, and schools should observe the latest 
guidance from the Center for Disease Control (CDC), BPS Health 
Services, and the Boston Public Health Commission as it relates 
to COVID-19 health and safety protocols. Absences as appropriate 
per the most up-to-date COVID-19 protocols are considered 
excused due to “medical/illness.” 
RECORD-KEEPING AND ATTENDANCE IMPROVEMENT 
School leaders bear final responsibility for improving attendance 
in their schools, balancing between accountability and positive 
engagement in their approach, and ensuring that performance 
evaluations reflect staff members’ efforts in complying with this 
policy and achieving the goal of improved attendance. 
School-based governance: Each school’s Attendance Team (AT) 
serves a critical role in prevention and intervention steps for 
students with high absenteeism. It is a best practice for school 
attendance teams to work in conjunction with the SST to refer 
students when all available attendance intervention strategies 
have been unsuccessful. It is also best practice for schools to 
initiate prevention steps with students in the early days of the 
school year or marking period. Schools should review students’ 
past attendance history to initiate prevention steps for students 
with a history of high absenteeism and refer students to the 
school’s AT. Students with three or more unexcused absences will 
be referred by a teacher or the school leader to the school’s AT on 
an ongoing basis. The AT will review the case and work with the 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 11 of 41 
 
 
family to develop a success plan to help the student improve 
attendance. School-based rules should be amended to include 
attendance-related guidelines established through the Quality 
School Plan (QSP). See Attendance Team Overview for additional 
guidance.  
ATTENDANCE IMPROVEMENT PLAN 
Developed as part of the QSP, a school’s Attendance 
Improvement Plan provides a roadmap of the critical prevention 
and intervention activities a school will conduct throughout the 
school year to ensure consistently high, on-time attendance for 
all students. Each school is required to update its attendance 
strategies in the QSP every 90 days. Schools should link a 
document with their attendance prevention and intervention 
steps by tier into the QSP.  
To assess their implementation progress and request more 
intensive assistance, the AT should complete the QSP 
Attendance Implementation Progress Tool (Q3PT) at the 30- and 
60-day marks of the QSP cycle. 
The Attendance Fundamentals by Tier serve as an additional 
resource. 
This program should start with a warm and welcoming school 
climate and should include phone calls home, student meetings, 
parent/caregiver meetings, development of an attendance 
plan/contract, attendance coaching, referral to Student Success 
Team meetings, and/or attendance meetings.  
Consistent follow-up and outreach to students and families 
struggling with chronic absenteeism is a fundamental best 
practice. Schools are expected to use the Panorama Student 
Success Platform to monitor student attendance progress, as 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 12 of 41 
 
 
well as to document interventions and success plans. Schools 
should also connect with community-based programs or 
organizations that can support truancy issues.  
Differentiating the Use of Aspen SIS and Panorama Student 
Success Platform: 
The Aspen Student Information System (SIS) is the system to 
capture critical information for student records and maintain 
compliance with regulatory requirements. As it relates to 
attendance, schools will take attendance in Aspen. However, 
schools expect to use the Panorama Student Success Platform to 
document all attendance prevention and intervention activities, 
using both the Support Notes feature and Tier 2 and 3 
Attendance Success Plans. Student attendance data entered in 
Aspen is transmitted nightly to Panorama for attendance 
monitoring and student success planning purposes. Staff should 
use both Aspen and Panorama as follows:  
Aspen will be used to: 
● input daily student attendance. 
● house the master student schedules and courses. 
● enter course grades. 
● house individual teacher schedules. 
● record teacher attendance. 
● record confidential student journal entries. 
● recommend to Suffolk County Juvenile Court and record 
documentation for an Attendance Intervention Plan (AIP). 
Panorama Student Success will be used to: 
● display student data. 
● house Attendance Success Plans (Tier 2 and Tier 3).  


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 13 of 41 
 
 
● assign team members for communication and 
collaboration. 
● record support notes related to student interventions and 
student success plans. 
● help track information in one place, including assessments 
from Illuminate.  
Note: The SOA is responsible for copying Attendance Success 
Plan documentation from Panorama if the case is recommended 
to the court and in other cases as necessary for compliance. 
All Attendance Success Plans should be recorded as Tier 2 or Tier 
3 plans in Panorama. Panorama allows the planning and 
recording of interventions, along with notes, to monitor the 
effectiveness of these interventions in setting improvement goals 
in the student success planning process. Attendance teams at 
the school level ensure Attendance Success Plans are created 
and monitored in Panorama for all students with high chronic 
absenteeism. At a minimum, every student who has attendance 
at or below 80% (appearing as attendance critical in “red”) should 
have an Attendance Success Plan in Panorama. It is a best 
practice for schools to coordinate and communicate student 
success planning with families. It is also a best practice for 
schools to establish an attendance success plan at the beginning 
of the school year for students who were chronically absent in 
the previous school year. Effective student success planning 
requires sharing the responsibility of plan creation, monitoring, 
and intervention strategies among school staff, including 
teachers, in collaboration with families,  
Who should have an Attendance Success Plan? 
Staff create the plan based on data in Panorama: 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 14 of 41 
 
 
● Tier 2 plans (best practice): Students whose attendance is 
90% or below will display as chronically absent in Panorama 
(yellow). 
● Tier 3 plans (required): Students whose attendance is 80% or 
less will appear as attendance-critical (red). 
An additional quality check:  
● Identify students with an AIP tag in Aspen (this tag indicates 
the student has high absenteeism in the current marking 
period and is eligible for truancy court referral).  
What are the Essential Steps when creating an Attendance 
Success Plan? 
Create Attendance Success Plan in Panorama, and remember 
these two key details: 
● Log as Attendance  
● Log as Tier 2 or Tier 3 
● Monitoring the plan collaborative and keeping it updated is 
essential to successful outcomes 
● Panorama will house student success plans (Tier 2 and Tier 
3) — academic, attendance, behavior. 
You will find more help with Panorama at the Office of Data & 
Accountability (ODA) Platforms Help Site.  
Questions: mtssdata@bostonpublicschools.org 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS PUNCTUALITY POLICY 
Students who arrive after the beginning of the school day are 
tardy. They must follow established tardy procedures to be 
considered present for the day. 
All students are expected to report to school on time every day. It 
is the policy of the Boston School Committee (approved May 24, 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 15 of 41 
 
 
2006) that tardy students should be permitted into the school 
building and not excluded. School leaders are directed to:  
(a) 
review their current school tardy policies in conjunction 
with School Site Councils,  
(b) 
develop reasonable, non-exclusionary practices to deal 
with student tardies and positive incentives to encourage 
punctuality, and  
(c) 
closely monitor compliance with these policies. 
 
It is important to remember that the requirement that tardy 
students be admitted to school does not equal a relaxation of the 
rules covering attendance or tardies. Schools must make every 
effort to encourage punctuality and discourage tardies. Schools 
are also encouraged to distinguish between first-time instances 
and repeated tardiness. 
According to School Committee policy (approved June 6, 2007), 
all high schools are directed to work with their School Site 
Councils and student representatives to establish fair and 
reasonable procedures to decrease student tardiness. These 
procedures must adhere to the following guidelines: 
1. Families must be notified by telephone call, in writing, or by 
email of a student’s tardies. Schools should follow the same 
prevention/intervention steps conducted for student 
absences.  
2. High school tardy procedures should explicitly detail how 
they plan to further involve families in working with 
students who exhibit excessive tardiness. As a rule of thumb, 
excessive tardiness can be defined as being tardy for 10% or 
more of school days. 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 16 of 41 
 
 
3. High schools’ tardy procedures should be linked in their 
Quality School Plan (QSP), the development of which is the 
responsibility of the School Site Council. 
4. As a best practice, all schools should establish attendance 
success plans in Panorama for students exhibiting excessive 
tardiness.  
All high schools, including pilot and Horace Mann charter schools, 
are required to complete their tardy procedures with the above 
guidelines (and other incentives/supports as deemed necessary 
by the School Site Council) no later than October. Each school 
must maintain a copy of its tardy procedures on file. 
1. The teacher must take attendance at the beginning of every 
class period in middle and high schools. After comparison of 
period attendance with the school's daily attendance, 
student cuts should be noted and addressed following the 
appropriate prevention/intervention steps.  
2. Middle and high school students who are tardy should be 
marked absent for any class(es) they miss.  
3. A student must be in attendance at least half of the school 
day to be considered present. Notations of early dismissal 
must be recorded with the time of dismissal, and 
documentation indicating the reason should be kept on file 
in accordance with school protocol. 
ATTENDANCE RECORDS 
The accounting and reporting of the attendance or absence of 
each student assigned to a school is one of the school leader's 
most critical responsibilities. Attendance record-keeping must be 
precise to ensure accurate accounting of each student and 
timely reporting of student attendance daily in the Aspen SIS. 
Every school leader is required to account for the attendance 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 17 of 41 
 
 
and/or absence of students and is required to investigate and 
take appropriate action for each absence. 
GENERAL ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS 
1. Attendance procedures must be reviewed with school staff 
by school leaders during the teacher professional 
development and training program before each school year. 
Each teacher must sign a document maintained at the 
school, verifying that they received these procedures and 
training. 
2. During the first week of school, homeroom teachers at all 
levels should make personal calls to the parents/guardians/ 
caregivers of their students to introduce themselves and 
invite the parents/guardians/caregivers either to visit the 
school or to call at any time to check on the attendance and 
progress of their children. The message should reinforce the 
need for consistent attendance and the procedures a 
parent/caregiver should follow if their child is absent. In the 
event any student has not reported at the start of the school 
year, the teacher should inquire about the student’s failure 
to attend. Teachers should document all communications 
by updating the Aspen SIS with the attendance reason code, 
including if a student will not be returning to school, and 
update Panorama success plans and/or support notes when 
applicable. 
Students are expected to report within eight (8) days of the 
first day of school or after an initial assignment. On the 
eighth day, the student will automatically become a DNR 
(Did Not Report) and be discharged from the school. Schools 
have the responsibility to contact the parent/caregiver if a 
student has not reported. Parents/caregivers should be 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 18 of 41 
 
 
made aware of this procedure when called if their children 
have not reported.  
Note: School leaders should always refer to the DNR 
Procedure Memo released annually by the Office of 
Welcome Services for the latest information regarding the 
DNR process. This memo also outlines the procedures for a 
DNR Exception. See the DNR Exception Form.  
DNR PROCEDURE 
For all students who do not report to school (DNR), the 
following procedures are in effect: 
i. 
A student will hold a NAS (Newly Assigned Student) 
code for a maximum of five (5) days after the first 
day of school or after the initial assignment. On the 
sixth day, a student will automatically become a 
DNR (Did Not Report). 
ii. 
A student will hold a DNR code for a maximum of 
three (3) days. At the end of the third day, a DNR 
student will automatically lose their seat at the 
assigned school. This will occur at the close of 
business on the eighth (8th) day of school.  
iii. 
On the third day of DNR status (or on the eighth day 
since the first day of school or of initial assignment), 
a student's seat will be eliminated, allowing the 
Office of Welcome Services to assign another 
student to that seat. 
iv. 
The student will remain on the DNR list of the 
school. See below for important details:  


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 19 of 41 
 
 
Each school leader still has the responsibility of 
investigating the situation and, if necessary, ultimately 
discharging the student to remove them from the DNR list.  
The discharge cannot happen until the school has 
conducted an exit interview and collected appropriate 
documentation from the family. This documentation must 
be uploaded to Aspen. Please see the DNR Aspen Guide. 
If you know that a student does not plan to enroll in BPS for 
the current school year and you have collected appropriate 
documentation from the family, you can withdraw them 
from BPS without waiting for them to be withdrawn as a 
DNR at the end of the eight-day period.  
Please make sure to maintain a record of the appropriate 
documentation, upload it to Aspen, and use the appropriate 
discharge code when discharging the student. Here is a link 
to the BPS Discharge Codes.  
For students with an IEP, the Special Education Department 
must also conduct an exit interview to inform the student 
and caregivers of their rights.  
The assigned supervisor of attendance (SOA) should be 
notified to provide additional assistance when a school 
cannot locate a student.  
Note: The DNR process does not automatically discharge 
any high-need special education students in an inclusion or 
substantially separate program (.3 or .4 students). 
3. School Attendance Teams (AT) at all levels are directed to 
monitor student attendance using the Panorama Student 
Success Platform and, in cases that so require, make 
referrals to the Student Success Team (SST) and/or the 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 20 of 41 
 
 
appropriate health or human/social service agencies or 
district services.  
One of the initial responsibilities of the AT, in collaboration 
with the SST, shall be to address the issues of (1) DNR 
students and (2) students who were chronically absent in 
the previous school year.  
The status of each student who did not report (DNR) at the 
start of the school year must also be investigated and 
determined before discharging the student. 
A primary focus of the AT is developing school-based 
absence prevention and intervention strategies. A three-
tiered attendance system should be established, with 
defined prevention and intervention practices that promote 
consistent attendance among all students. The Attendance 
Fundamentals by Tier is a resource and the BPS Tiered 
Attendance System (TAS) is available to all schools as a 
framework to help establish and improve their attendance 
practices across tiers. 
4. Complex cases and students with extensive patterns of 
chronic absenteeism should be referred to supervisors of 
attendance and/or the SST as appropriate after extensive 
prevention/intervention steps have been tried and 
documented.  
WITHDRAWING STUDENTS 
Once the school year has begun, the withdrawal of students that 
are no longer enrolled at your school can be made at the school 
level, not by Central Office staff. It is imperative that school staff 
verify where the student is enrolled prior to withdrawing a 
student. Please remember to keep documentation as to where 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 21 of 41 
 
 
the student is enrolling. Written or emailed documentation is 
preferred. If the family texts you, we suggest sending a 
screenshot to your email to make sure it is saved. This 
documentation must be uploaded to the Aspen SIS. Also, please 
make sure to use the appropriate discharge code when you 
withdraw the student from BPS. Here are BPS Discharge Codes. 
Acceptable documentation for withdrawing students includes: 
1. A written request for a student’s records from a receiving 
public or private high school or an educational program 
(that culminates in a regular high school diploma). This 
includes requests from the receiving school that come to 
the district through Scrib Order. 
2. Written record of a response from an official in the receiving 
school or program acknowledging the student’s enrollment. 
3. Written confirmation that a student has moved to another 
country and will be continuing their education. For example, 
if a parent informs a school administrator that the family is 
leaving the country, the school administrator may 
document this conversation in writing. 
4. Letter from a parent/guardian updating the school 
enrollment status of their child, including indication that 
they will be continuing their education elsewhere. 
5. Letter from the BPS Office of Expanded Learning Time 
indicating an approved Educational Plan for homeschooling. 
6. Record from the state's data system (Edwin DESE Security 
Portal - Central Office Process) 
If you do not have the above documentation at the time of 
withdrawal, the student must be withdrawn as a dropout. See 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 22 of 41 
 
 
Aspen HelpDoc BPS Withdrawal Codes for a table of withdrawal 
codes with acceptable matching documentation. 
Note: The assigned supervisor of attendance should be notified 
to provide additional assistance when a school cannot locate a 
student.  
DISCHARGE PROCEDURES 
Students 16 Years of Age or Older On October 1st of the School 
Year – Per MGL Ch. 76 Sec. 18: 
1. By the first week of October, the school leader shall have 
access to the list of students with the designation NAS or 
DNR. 
2. Within 5 days of the tenth consecutive absence, the school 
leader must contact in writing (in the primary language 
spoken in the home) the parent/caregiver of the student 16 
years of age or older to inform them of the requirements of 
MGL c.76 s.18, and to request a meeting to discuss the 
educational implications for the student if they do not 
return to school, the benefits of earning a diploma, the 
student’s reason(s) for wanting to leave school, and to 
consider alternative education or other placements. The 
notice shall offer at least two dates and times for an exit 
interview, that the parties will agree to a date, and that the 
meeting will take place within 10 days after the sending of 
the notice. The school leader must reproduce and use the 
sample form letter linked here and submit a copy to the 
director of the BPS Re-Engagement Center within one 
week. For students who have an IEP, the Special Education 
Department must also conduct an exit interview to inform 
the student and caregivers of their additional due process 
rights.  


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 23 of 41 
 
 
3. The school leader must conduct the meeting at the 
convenience of the parent/caregiver, but within 10 days of 
the sending of the notice. Upon parent/caregiver request, an 
extension not to exceed 14 days may be granted. 
4. If the student reports to school after the exit interview with 
the parent/caregiver, the school leader must ensure that the 
student is marked “P” on the attendance record.  
5. If the student does not or shall not return to school after the 
exit interview with the parent/caregiver, the school leader 
must request a statement of the parent/caregiver on the 
Sample Form Letter linked here. Submit a copy of this letter 
to the BPS Re-Engagement Center and operational leader 
and discharge the student using the protocol described in 
this circular. This form is for a student whose assignment 
within the Boston Public Schools is to be terminated, i.e., the 
student is going to a private or public school outside the 
City of Boston, or the unknown student whose absences 
have been investigated thoroughly, or the student who has 
"dropped out" of school. This process requires the following: 
a. Retain one copy of the documentation at the school in 
which the discharge is initiated. 
b. Upload documentation to the Aspen SIS. 
c. Issue one copy to the parent/caregiver of the student 
going to a private school or another public school 
system. 
d. Issue one copy to the superintendent of the new school 
system. If the student has transferred to either a 
private school or to a charter school, this copy is sent to 
the principal of the new school. 


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 24 of 41 
 
 
6. Only after a good-faith effort to include the parent/caregiver 
can the exit interview with the student take place without 
the presence of the parent/caregiver. 
7. The school leader must maintain detailed and readily 
accessible records for each student justifying the activation 
of discharge, which should be uploaded to the Aspen SIS. 
Students Under 6 Years of Age on October 1st of the School Year 
1. Within a week after the receipt of the NAS/DNR printout, 
the school leader must contact in writing the 
parent/caregiver of the student to inform them that a place 
for the student has been reserved in the educational 
program of the school. The parent/caregiver is encouraged 
to ensure the student's attendance, AND the student must 
report within one week, or the student shall be discharged. 
Please use the attached form letter. 
2. If the student does not report within one week, the school 
leader must discharge the student according to the 
procedures described in this circular. No additional 
communication with the parent/caregiver is required.  
Note: School leaders shall not discharge a student between 
the ages of six and sixteen years until all procedures noted 
in this circular are completed. Written notice should be 
received by the supervisors of attendance.  
Discharge Codes 
It is important to use the appropriate discharge code when 
withdrawing the student from BPS. Here is a copy of the 
BPS Discharge Codes. 


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 25 of 41 
 
 
GENERAL ATTENDANCE AND PUNCTUALITY PROCEDURES 
1. School leaders must designate a member of their staff who 
will be responsible for coordinating and monitoring the 
school's attendance plan. This person shall report directly to 
the building administrator concerning this effort and should 
be part of the school AT. A best practice is to have this 
person lead or co-facilitate the AT when appropriate. The 
plan should take a whole-school approach and fully engage 
the staff in implementing a tiered attendance system. 
School leaders should also ensure that staff is assigned to 
monitor attendance data and trends on an ongoing basis, 
which may require additional training from the Office of 
Instructional and Information Technology, Office of Data 
and Accountability, or Department of Opportunity Youth 
(SOAs). 
2. Each student is marked Absent in the Student Information 
System (SIS) on the first day of school and must be marked 
Present to begin official enrollment. Enter a P on the first 
day of attendance. Students who appear after the first day 
of school should be entered on the date of appearance with 
a P. 
3. Official attendance will be taken and reported on the SIS 
system by teachers. The central office will make an 
automated call to all students coded as Absent by 11:00 am 
every day.  
4. Students who arrive after the beginning of the day are tardy. 
They must follow established tardy procedures to be 
considered present for the day.  


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 26 of 41 
 
 
SUGGESTED STRATEGIES TO ADDRESS TARDINESS AND 
ABSENTEEISM 
In developing their Attendance Improvement Plan, schools 
should focus on a positive approach to attendance, using 
consistent prevention/intervention steps and implementing 
specific strategies to address tardiness and absenteeism. The 
district has developed a Tiered Attendance System (TAS) to 
support schools in ensuring the consistency and effectiveness of 
their attendance practices across the school, while the Panorama 
Student Success Platform provides a framework to track and 
monitor individual student attendance, interventions, and 
success planning. See also Attendance Fundamentals by Tier.  
Examples of strategies to address tardiness and absenteeism 
include: 
● Tiered intervention and prevention programs: 
Tier 1: Reliable attendance reporting from every 
classroom; positive school climate initiatives such as 
maintaining positive relationships among school staff, 
students, and families; consistent intervention and 
prevention activities with documentation in Panorama; 
School Attendance Committee; School Attendance 
Culture. 
Tier 2: Targeted attendance letters; attendance contracts; 
student/family conferences; attendance success plans; 
attendance coaching; mentorship programming. 
Tier 3: Intensive case management or mentorship; 
specialized programming; assigning staff to intentional 
student check-ins; connections with and/or referrals to 
specific support services or community resources. 
● Use of restorative justice practices 


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 27 of 41 
 
 
● Parent/caregiver and/or student-centered conferences 
● Contracting with the student and/or parent/caregiver 
● Learning Recovery/Attendance Buy-Back Time (for repeated 
tardiness or unexcused absences) 
Note: Schools are prohibited from excluding students from 
physical activity during the school day, such as during recess 
or physical education, as a disciplinary consequence. However, 
a student may be prohibited from participating in athletics or 
extracurricular activities on a school day when an unexcused 
absence causes a student to miss more than 50% of the school 
day.  
Suggested other steps: 
● Make MBTA schedules available at schools. 
● Post rules on tardiness and punctuality in visible locations. 
● Hold a conference with student and family for repeated 
tardiness. 
● Make phone calls to families of students who are tardy. 
● Work with Attendance Team and/or SST and/or to 
investigate root causes for student tardiness. 
● Establish Student Planning Centers. 
Please see the BPS Code of Conduct for additional guidance 
regarding suggested strategies.  
NOTIFICATION TO PARENTS/CAREGIVERS WHEN STUDENTS 
ARE ABSENT 
School leaders should inform all students and parents/caregivers 
by means of a written bulletin, newsletter, or SchoolMessenger at 
the beginning of each school year of the Attendance Policy and 
the basic school attendance procedures adopted by the School 


Page 28:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 28 of 41 
 
 
Site Council. This information should be sent in the language of 
the home.  
Parents/caregivers should be advised that a signed note of 
explanation shall be required each time a student is absent. The 
note should state the date(s) of absence, the reason, the 
parent/caregiver contact information, and the parent/caregiver 
signature. The note should be sent in on the day the student 
returns to school. The note must be received within seven (7) 
school days following the absence. Here is a Sample 
Parent/Caregiver Note for Excused Absence. Schools are 
expected to use Panorama to document and monitor attendance 
intervention activities, including documentation of each step 
described below. 
1. First Absence 
The building administrator is responsible for ensuring that 
school staff notifies parents/caregivers by telephone of all 
student absences. This is best accomplished by the 
homeroom teacher. In these conversations, 
parents/caregivers should be reminded of (1) the need to 
submit a note of explanation to document the reason each 
time a student is absent, (2) the importance of consistent, 
on-time attendance for a student to be successful in school, 
and (3) that unexcused absences could result in the student 
falling behind academically. 
2. Second and Third Absence 
Parents/caregivers must be notified in writing no later than 
the student’s third absence (even if the absences were 
“excused”) and on a regular basis thereafter. This notification 
should include the attendance requirement, the number of 


Page 29:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 29 of 41 
 
 
days missed compared to the number of school days in the 
marking period, and the impact of continued absence on 
the student’s success. Note: These absences do not need to 
be consecutive. This letter must be written in the language 
of the home. Here is a Sample Absence Letter which can be 
placed on the school’s letterhead. 
3. Third Unexcused Absence 
After the third unexcused absence, the student must be 
referred to the SST by the homeroom teacher. The team will 
review the case and meet to develop recommendations to 
assist the student in improving attendance. The team may 
invite the parent/caregiver and, at the secondary level, the 
student to the meeting; however, if the parent/caregiver 
does not attend the meeting, an effort must be made by the 
school to contact and discuss the case with the 
parent/caregiver. It is recommended that the SST develop 
an attendance success plan in Panorama at this step. 
 
 


Page 30:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 30 of 41 
 
 
4. Fourth Unexcused Absence 
At the fourth unexcused absence in any term, a meeting 
shall be convened by the school leader, to which the 
parent/caregiver shall be invited. If the school is unable to 
contact the parent/caregiver, a home visit should be 
conducted. The implications of student absence from 
school, as well as the current academic status of the 
student, will be discussed at this meeting. The success plan 
developed by the SST after the third unexcused absence 
should be reviewed.  
5. Fifth Through Seventh Unexcused Absence 
At the fifth unexcused absence, the student and the family 
should be referred to the Family Resource Center or 
assigned supervisor of attendance.  
6. Eighth Unexcused Absence 
After the eighth unexcused absence, for a student younger 
than 16 years of age, the school’s designated attendance 
representative shall coordinate with the assigned supervisor 
of attendance to determine if it is necessary and appropriate 
to file a truancy case with the Suffolk County Juvenile Court. 
Instructions for Recommending an Attendance Intervention 
Plan for Court describe the necessary steps to recommend a 
case for court. In addition, the school should coordinate with 
the school social worker for additional support.  
This Notification to Parents/Caregivers When Students Are 
Absent condenses the process described above. It serves as a 
reference document for staff. 


Page 31:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 31 of 41 
 
 
Absence, tardy, and early dismissal notations must be recorded in 
the Aspen SIS daily as the official system of record. School-wide 
attendance monitoring using the Panorama Student Success 
Platform should be conducted by the school leader or their 
designee on a regular basis, but no less frequently than monthly. 
EXCUSED ABSENCES 
The student attendance record must be updated to reflect the 
excused absence. An excused absence is defined as an absence 
caused by sickness, injury, hospitalization, court appearances, 
religious holy days, or the death of an immediate family member.  
The school may accept other reasons for an excused absence as 
approved by the school leader; however, if a note of explanation 
is not received, the absence shall be deemed “unexcused.” 
However, it is important to remember that all absences are 
included as it relates to chronic absenteeism, regardless of 
whether the absence is excused or unexcused. Prevention and 
intervention steps should be conducted by the school to 
minimize missed instructional time, regardless of whether 
absences are excused or unexcused. In addition, 
parents/caregivers should be informed of the definition of 
chronic absenteeism and the impact it has on student outcomes: 
Chronic absenteeism is defined as missing 10 percent or more of 
the school year in any given period. All absences are included as 
it relates to chronic absenteeism, regardless of whether the 
absence is excused or unexcused. For an entire school year, a 
student who misses 18 school days, or about two days per month, 
will be considered chronically absent.  
Parents/guardians/caregivers should be informed, as part of the 
School-Based Rules, of those reasons that are accepted as 


Page 32:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 32 of 41 
 
 
“excused” and those that are not acceptable to excuse an 
absence. 
NOTIFICATION TO PARENTS/CAREGIVERS SHOULD A CHILD 
LEAVE SCHOOL 
1. All students must be supervised by a responsible adult at all 
times during the school day. 
2. Should a child be noted as missing, the school leader should 
be notified immediately. 
3. After an initial search of the school and immediate 
neighborhood, the parent/caregiver should be notified by 
telephone as promptly as possible, and the appropriate 
departments should be notified. (See Superintendent’s 
Circular SAF-09, Lost Children Procedures). 
SAFETY CONCERNS RELATED TO ATTENDANCE 
To maximize the protection and safety of all students, schools 
should take the following measures: 
1. Emphasize to the parent/caregiver that they should arrange 
to be sure that their children reach the bus stop on time 
every morning and that they board the bus. This should be 
stressed in newsletters sent home at the start of each school 
year. 
2. Inform the parent/caregiver that they should notify the 
school by telephone each day that their child will be absent 
due to illness, etc. 
3. Inform the parent/caregiver as soon as possible, including 
through the SchoolMessenger system, of their children’s 
absence. 


Page 33:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 33 of 41 
 
 
4. Ensure that the parent/caregiver supplies the school with 
accurate, up-to-date home and emergency telephone 
numbers and indicates the place their children should go if 
they miss the bus, e.g., the home of a relative, friend, 
neighbor, etc. These emergency numbers should be 
updated as necessary.  
 
HOME & HOSPITAL TUTORING 
When a physician determines that a student is physically unable 
to attend school for more than 14 consecutive days or anticipated 
to accumulate more than 14 absences in a school year, the 
student should be offered tutoring at home or in the hospital. 
The referral should be made to the Home & Hospital Instruction 
program when the school nurse receives a Physician Statement. 
The attendance for students participating in the Home & Hospital 
Instruction Program should be marked “constructively present” 
(CP). The school must document in writing all offers of home 
tutoring and acceptances or rejections by the parent or caregiver. 
If a parent/caregiver rejects home tutoring or other appropriate 
academic services for a child who will be absent for an extended 
period, a record of that rejection must be retained in the 
student’s file, and a 51A should be filed with the Department of 
Children and Families (DCF). When it is deemed by the student’s 
attending physician or pediatrician that they will be confined to a 
home or hospital setting for more than 60 days, the student will 
then be considered for evaluation (if not a student with an IEP); 
or if a student with an IEP, the student will then be considered for 
a possible IEP amendment or new IEP by the Office of Special 
Education under state regulation 603 CMR 28.04(4). 


Page 34:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 34 of 41 
 
 
PROCEDURES FOR REFERRAL TO SUPERVISORS OF 
ATTENDANCE 
SOAs build schools’ capacity to reduce chronic absenteeism. See 
SOA Overview for details on how they can support your school. 
This iteration of the attendance policy calls on schools to take 
ownership of attendance and supportive interventions and to use 
referrals to supervisors of attendance as only a measure of last 
resort. In that context, this circular reflects the Boston Public 
Schools’ procedures for referring students to the supervisors of 
attendance (SOA). Under M.G.L. c.119, Section 21, Section 39E, 
Section 39F, and Section 39G, Boston Juvenile Court may hear 
petitions to determine if a child needs services. In Boston Public 
Schools, only the SOA may file a Child Requiring Assistance (CRA) 
petition on behalf of the district for attendance or behavior-
related matters. 
 It contains guidelines on: 
● Procedures for referrals and Attendance Intervention Plan 
(AIP) 
● Child Requiring Assistance (CRA) filings 
● Adult Failure to Cause (ADF). 
BACKGROUND 
M.G.L. c.119 Part 1 Title XII Chapter 69 Section 10 states that the 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education shall adopt 
regulations establishing a truancy prevention program 
certification process, consistent with the behavioral health and 
public schools framework developed pursuant to section 19 of 
chapter 321 of the acts of 2008, and shall require that the truancy 
prevention program evaluate the level of out-of-school support 
for students and families and address conditions that make 
students more likely to become truant including, but not limited 


Page 35:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 35 of 41 
 
 
to, previously unidentified or inadequately addressed special 
needs, bullying, and harassment. Any truancy prevention 
program established under this section by a school district shall 
meet the requirements for certification adopted by the 
department.  
Supervisors of attendance, working in collaboration with school 
staff and external agencies, may file a court referral based on 
investigative findings, prior attendance patterns, and present 
problematic attendance. The filing of a CRA is the last resort if 
other interventions by school, external agencies, and/or 
attendance staff fail to bring about improvement.   
The SOA may file the following CRA petitions with the mandatory 
parent/caregiver date of birth:   
● Habitually Truant: Civil charge filed on students who miss 
school for 8 days in a quarter. 
● Student Who Repeatedly Fails to Obey Regulations of the 
School: Civil charges filed on students who repeatedly fail to 
obey the lawful and reasonable regulations of the student’s 
school. 
● Adult Failure to Cause: Petition filed when a student’s 
absence is beyond their control, but due to a caretaker’s 
action or inaction, e.g., the child is too young to get to school 
on their own. 
ATTENDANCE INTERVENTION PLAN (AIP) 
While all attendance intervention activities should now be 
documented in the Panorama Student Success Platform, the 
Attendance Intervention Plan (AIP) is available for each student 
having four or more unexcused absences in the Aspen SIS. The 
AIP in Aspen SIS serves the following purposes: 


Page 36:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 36 of 41 
 
 
● To identify students who are eligible for a court referral due 
to eight or more unexcused absences in a marking period. 
● For school leaders to recommend a case to court as a last 
resort when all attendance prevention/intervention 
strategies have been exhausted. 
● To document any compliance-related attendance 
intervention activities, particularly for cases that are 
recommended to the court. Supervisors of attendance 
(SOAs) will ensure that any compliance-related 
documentation from Panorama is also entered to Aspen 
(that is: if a case moves toward the court, the SOA is 
responsible for copying the intervention plan from 
Panorama into Aspen). 
● For a quality check, wherein school attendance staff can 
verify that all students who have an AIP generated in Aspen 
SIS (because of four or more unexcused absences in a 
marking period) also have an Attendance Success Plan 
created in Panorama. As a best practice, all chronically 
absent students should have an Attendance Success Plan in 
Panorama. 
Once a student has eight unexcused absences in a marking 
period, the school leader may recommend the AIP for court in 
the SIS. Supervisors of attendance (SOAs) will ensure that any 
compliance-related documentation is also entered into Aspen, 
including the attendance success plan, with attendance 
intervention steps that were conducted with the student, as 
documented using Panorama.  
The parent/caregiver date of birth (DOB) is required in the judicial 
process. The AIP will require the submission of the 
parent/caregiver date of birth and documentation of intervention 


Page 37:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 37 of 41 
 
 
steps as an Attendance Success Plan in Panorama. Without this 
information, the AIP cannot be recommended for court.  
The SOA will investigate and report their recommendation in the 
SOA comment section. The comments can be viewed by the 
senders and the school leaders. The senders and the school 
leaders can view the comments. Instructions for Recommending 
an Attendance Intervention Plan for Court are here. 
SCHOOL STEPS IN THE CHILD REQUIRING ASSISTANCE (CRA) 
PROCESS 
CRA:  Truancy  
1. Upon the 4th unexcused absence, the school leader or 
designated staff and homeroom teacher will receive an 
email notification from SIS informing them that an 
Attendance Intervention Plan (AIP) has been initiated 
during the term for a student.  
2. Upon the 8th unexcused absence during the term, the 
school leader or designated staff or homeroom teacher can 
recommend that a student AIP be sent to court due to 
excessive absences and non-compliance with the student’s 
Attendance Success Plan, as documented in Panorama. The 
AIP cannot be recommended for court if the student does 
not have an Attendance Success Plan documented in 
Panorama. At this time, the appropriate SOA will investigate 
the case, referring to the action already taken by the school 
to date and to the results that they have reported. The 
investigation may include phone calls, 
home/parent/caregiver work-site visits, school visits and 
telephone calls, letters to parents/caregivers where 
necessary, and, in some cases, contact with and referral to 
involved agencies. 


Page 38:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 38 of 41 
 
 
3. The SOA will report the results of the investigation to the 
school through the SIS system. The supervisor will also ask 
that schools keep them informed of further attendance 
problems. 
4. If attendance does not improve, schools must send 
additional AIPs to the Attendance Office only if the open 
CRA has been closed, alerting the SOA to follow up once 
more. Additional interventions should be documented in 
Panorama to update the SOA on the school's subsequent 
actions and results. 
5. Subsequent investigation and follow-up will occur through 
response in the SIS system, email, or attendance meeting. 
6. Supervisors of attendance, working with school staff, make 
decisions on future action based on investigative findings, 
prior attendance patterns, and correspondence with 
parents/caregivers and the school. One option is court 
referral. The decision to file a CRA is made by the SOA based 
on the finding and results of steps 1-4 and only after 
exhausting all other possible courses of action. The CRA will 
only be filed if the student has accumulated eight or more 
unexcused absences in a single quarter and the school has 
documented intervention steps using the Attendance 
Success Plan feature in Panorama. 
7. When the AIP is recommended for court, the SOA will notify 
the school of this action using the Attendance Supervisor's 
Information Form or will make personal or telephone 
contact. A probation officer will be assigned to the child by 
the court if a CRA is filed. 
8. If attendance does not improve following a CRA filing, 
communication with the assigned probation officer and/or 
the SOA is required. 


Page 39:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 39 of 41 
 
 
CRA FOR STUDENT WHO REPEATEDLY FAILS TO OBEY 
REGULATIONS OF THE SCHOOL 
Decisions to file a Child Requiring Assistance (CRA) for a 
student who repeatedly fails to obey regulations of the school 
with the Suffolk County Juvenile Court should follow the 
prevention/intervention steps and best practices of the BPS 
Code of Conduct, including the Philosophy and Guiding 
Principles. NOTE: A CRA for a student who repeatedly fails to 
obey the regulations of the school can only be filed for 
students in grade 6 and above.  
1. After the third serious violation of school rules, the school 
will request a CRA (repeatedly fails to obey school 
regulations) in the SIS system to the Attendance Office for 
follow-up and investigation. After filling out the request, the 
following documents should be accompanied via fax: copies 
of a letter signed by a school official on letterhead with the 
prevention/intervention steps taken to improve the 
student’s behavior. The school should also provide 
documentation of the three serious violations.  
2. The SOA will investigate the case and determine whether a 
filing is warranted. They will report the decision to the 
school. 
3. When the CRA petition is filed, the SOA will notify the school 
of this action using the attendance supervisor's SIS card or 
will make personal or telephone contact. A probation officer 
will be assigned to the child by the court. 
4. If the student’s behavior does not improve following a CRA 
filing, communication with the assigned probation officer 
and/or the SOA is required, and the school should continue 
to proceed with appropriate action under the Code of 
Conduct. 


Page 40:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 40 of 41 
 
 
CRA: ADULT-FAILURE-TO-CAUSE PROCESS (ADF) 
These cases are criminal complaints filed against 
parents/caregivers who willfully prevent their children from 
attending school. This is a serious charge requiring the sworn 
testimony of the SOA on the school's behalf. Courts can fine 
parents/caregivers, and in extreme cases, further 
consequences can result from non-compliance. 
The steps are the same as described for CRA cases, except that 
it is filed against the parent/caregiver if the investigation 
conducted by the SOA finds evidence to justify the filing, and 
information about the parent/caregiver is required, which, in 
some cases, can only be obtained by school staff. For example, 
the complaint cannot be filed without the parent/caregiver’s 
date of birth and physical description, as well as documented 
evidence of attendance interventions using the Attendance 
Success Plan feature in Panorama. Therefore, it is important 
that school staff capture this information in advance of 
recommending a case for court.  
 
 


Page 41:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 41 of 41 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Opportunity Youth 
Department: 
Department of Opportunity Youth 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-9620 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-02 
Version 01 
 
 
WORK ORDER REQUESTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
All work requests are to be submitted through Asset Essentials. 
The following procedures are to be followed when originating 
work requests. 
ASSET ESSENTIALS  
You will be able to login through your Google App launcher, 
which is the icon at the top of your Gmail (3 by 3 box.) Scroll down 
until you see the "SchoolDude - Asset Essentials" icon.  
REQUEST FORMAT 
Each request begins by selecting the school from the drop-down 
menu. Please provide a detailed description of the work needed, 
including the floor, room number, and room name (if there is 
one). Please note the system will automatically collect your email 
address for return messages.   
EMERGENCIES 
Call emergencies into the Planning and Engineering Office 
immediately at 617-635-8300 or 617-635-9135. You may also call 
the appropriate Planning and Engineering supervisor to report 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-02 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 
any emergency. After calling in the emergency, enter the 
emergency Work Order Request into the system by the end of 
the day, indicating that it was an emergency, and the request is a 
confirming order. 
EXTERNAL FUNDS 
If the costs are to be charged to an external funding source, 
indicate in the request to what account the costs should be 
charged.  Refer to Superintendent’s Circular — External Funding 
of Renovations to School Buildings and Yards. 
STATUS OF WORK ORDER REQUESTS 
Once a Work Order Request has been submitted for initial 
review, you will be able to view the status and actions taken by 
Planning and Engineering staff on the initial request. 
Status codes are as follows: 
● In Progress - We have decided to move forward with 
obtaining an estimate from a contractor.  Once we have 
obtained an estimate from a contractor, we will assess and 
make a final decision.   
● On Hold - The decision has been made to put this on hold 
for right now. You will be able to view the status and actions 
taken by Planning and Engineering staff on the initial 
request. There will be a detailed note explaining this 
decision.  
● Denied - The decision has been made to not proceed with 
this work order. You will be able to view the status and 
actions taken by Planning and Engineering staff on the 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-02 
Page 3 of 6 
 
 
initial request. There will be a detailed note explaining this 
decision.  
● Capital Project - This has been deemed to be a capital 
project and so it has been forwarded to the Capital Project 
team.  
● Completed - Once a supervisor has provided estimated 
costs, contractors to complete the work, and estimated 
completion date, and a final decision has been rendered, 
you will be able to review the status and actions taken by 
Planning and Engineering staff. 
► Please note that, for most approved work orders, you 
generally will not receive a note. If your request is put On 
Hold, Denied, or Capital Project, you will generally receive a 
note explaining the reason for the decision.  
SUBDIVISION OF CLASSROOMS/CHANGE IN 
OCCUPANCY/REQUEST FOR SUBDIVISION OF CLASSROOMS 
FOR OFFICE SPACE 
Requests for subdivision for expanding classroom space must: 
● be submitted on the attached Request for Space 
Modification Form (Attachment A) with location and 
purpose. 
● be approved by the director of Student Assignment and 
director of Facilities Management. 
● meet building codes for safety. 
 
Partitioning of non-educational spaces such as cafeterias, 
gymnasiums, or corridors is prohibited. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-02 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 
► PLEASE NOTE, ALL APPROVALS ARE SUBJECT TO THE 
AVAILABILITY OF FUNDING 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Executive Director of Facilities 
Department: 
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 
1216 Dorchester Avenue, Boston, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9170 
Fax: 
617-635-9252 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-02 
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
ATTACHMENT A 
REQUEST FOR SPACE MODIFICATION 
Request for any programmatic plan that changes existing space 
in a school building must be done in writing.  Please complete 
the Request Form below and submit to the director of the 
Student Assignment Unit. 
A. Request: 
School: _______________________________________Date:  
 
Detail of Space Modification:   
 
 
 
 
 
Rationale for Modification:   
 
 
 
 
 
Source of Funding:   
☐ Requested from Facilities Management         
☐ School Funds Available                ☐ Grant Funds Available 
Principal/Head of School signature:   
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-02 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 
B. Approval / Non-Approval: 
Director of Student Assignment: 
□ Approved / supports enrollment capacity needs. 
□ Not approved / negatively impacts enrollment capacity 
needs. 
□ No impact on enrollment capacity needs / move to Facilities 
Management for decision. 
 
Signature: ___________________________________Date:  
 
Director of Facilities Management: 
□ Approved / supports enrollment capacity needs.  Funding 
will be allocated. 
□ Approved / no impact on enrollment and funding identified 
by principal/head of school. 
□ Not approved / no funding available. 
□ Not approved / building code violation. 
 
Signature: ___________________________________Date:  
 
 
Upon final decision regarding Approval / Non-Approval, a copy of 
same will be forwarded to the principal/head of school initiating 
the request for space modification. 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-11 
Version 01 
 
 
 
GREEN CLEANERS’ POLICY  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
BACKGROUND  
High-performance schools that have superior indoor air quality 
and are healthy and well maintained have been shown to reduce 
absenteeism and improve student performance. Many Boston 
school children suffer from allergies and asthma, which can be 
triggered by poor air quality and chemical, biological, and 
particulate contaminants. Long or short-term exposure to toxic 
chemicals or harmful particles, gasses, or vapors can have serious 
consequences, especially for children, such as asthma, allergies, 
depression, hormonal changes, or even cancer. To ensure the 
best quality learning environment for our students and working 
environment for our staff, it is the responsibility of the Boston 
Public Schools (BPS) to minimize the negative impacts that 
cleaning products have on occupant health and the 
environment.  
POLICY  
The BPS is committed to providing and maintaining high-
performing buildings and grounds in an environmentally friendly 
and sustainable manner. The Green Cleaners Policy is in 
accordance with the City of Boston’s executive order relative to 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-11 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
 
greening city building maintenance and operations and 
executive order relative to climate action. This policy applies to all 
BPS buildings and grounds, including offices, classrooms, 
restrooms, cafeterias, gymnasiums, hallways, pathways, 
kitchenettes, stairwells, etc.  
Under this green cleaning policy, BPS departments, school sites, 
and partner programs taking place in schools must comply with 
the following:  
● Purchase, provide, and use only environmentally friendly 
cleaning products that comply with the Green Seal 
Environmental Standard (GS-37), including but not limited 
to glass, bathroom, carpet, and general-purpose cleaners 
used for industrial and institutional purposes.  
● All other non-approved cleaning products are prohibited 
from being used in BPS buildings and grounds by any staff, 
volunteer, vendor, or partner.  
● Use of disinfectants for cleaning shall be limited to food 
service areas and the clean-up of biological and bodily 
wastes and “high touch areas” (when directed). All 
disinfectants must be premixed, registered by the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, and have a Hazardous 
Materials Identification System (HMIS) rating of 2 or less.  
● Pre-approved or least toxic and asthma friendly 
sanitizer/disinfectants must be used in early learning 
centers in accordance with the National Association of 
Education for Young Children accreditation standards. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-11 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN  
BPS Facilities Management and custodial staff will maintain this 
policy through these implementation steps: 
● Ensure vendors can provide proof that their products meet 
the criteria for Green Seal Environmental Standard for 
Cleaning Products for Industrial and Institutional Use, GS-37. 
The Green Seal program is a North American multi-attribute, 
lifecycle environmental standard and certification.  
● Burnish floor surfaces where applicable to reduce the use of 
potentially irritating cleaning and stripping compounds. Any 
necessary floor stripping and waxing will be performed 
during non-occupied hours.  
● Automatic mixing stations will be installed for custodial use 
that dispense pre-mixed products to ensure the active 
ingredient concentration required by the EPA, limit 
employee contact with chemicals for enhanced safety, and 
minimize waste.  
● Upon request, school custodians will provide teachers and 
other BPS staff with OSHA-compliant pre-labeled spray 
bottles of mixed green cleaning compounds (desktop and 
glass cleaners) that meet the Green Cleaning Policy 
standards.  
● Train and update BPS custodial staff and others who use 
chemicals on the Green Cleaners Policy, including but not 
limited to hazard communications (Right to Know law, 
MSDS, etc.), worker safety and personal protective 
equipment use, safe and proper product and equipment 
use, etc.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-11 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
 
● Custodians will participate on the school’s Wellness Council 
to ensure compliance with this policy as well as other 
Healthy School Environment policies and initiatives 
(recycling, integrated pest management, etc.).  
● To the greatest extent possible, cleaning materials and 
associated packaging will be reused and/or recycled to 
minimize waste.  
● Protocols governing safe handling and storage of cleaning 
chemicals shall be adopted. Quality control checks will be 
used to ensure adoption.  
RESPONSIBLE PARTIES  
This policy is overseen by the BPS Facilities Management 
Department and is updated annually to help ensure cleaning 
practices, products, and technologies specified in this policy 
meet industry standards and best practices.  
BPS staff, contractors, and vendors shall review this policy and 
may request additional information and training as required. 
 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-11 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner:  
Assistant Director, Building Services 
Department:  
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address:  
1216 Dorchester Ave, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-9576 
Fax:  
617-635-9306 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-10 
 Version 01 
 
INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT (IPM)  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
MISSION STATEMENT  
To further ensure a healthy and safe learning and work 
environment at all Boston Public School (BPS) buildings, BPS will 
be implementing a systemwide IPM program. IPM is a holistic 
approach to control pest activity and to reduce pesticide usage in 
the building and surrounding landscape.  
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN  
A key component of an effective IPM plan is the selection of an 
IPM coordinator. The IPM coordinator should be someone with 
administrative authority to adequately enforce and implement 
the program. The IPM coordinator acts as a representative of the 
principal. The IPM coordinator is required to establish an IPM 
Committee, which will include interested stockholders (e.g., 
custodian(s), after school program, community school (as 
applicable), food service manager, teacher, etc.).  
State laws and regulations require all school buildings and 
licensed daycares to register an indoor and outdoor IPM plan 
with the Massachusetts Department of Agricultural Resources 
(MDAR). The law requires the IPM plans to be updated and 
registered annually. The pest control contractor (PCC) is 
responsible to annually update the indoor and outdoor plan.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-10 
Page 2 of 7 
 
All IPM plans must be updated annually by the pest control 
contractor by December 1. The PCC will meet with the 
principal/head of school or designee to update the plan. The 
updates will include but not be limited to technical components, 
pest treatment products, and devices of the IPM plan. The 
principal/head of school or designated representative (i.e., IPM 
coordinator) will provide the PCC with the school's information, 
including but not limited to school name and address, name of 
principal/head of school, IPM coordinator’s name, IPM Committee 
members, etc. 
The logbook must contain the following sections: 
• A copy of the MDAR approved indoor and outdoor IPM 
plan 
• Complaint/sighting forms 
• Pest control contractor inspection and treatment reports 
• Treatment product health and safety information (similar 
to a material safety data sheet)  
• Pest control contractor (PCC) information (name and 
address of company, contact person, telephone number, 
etc.) 
NOTE: It’s very important that all pest problems/issues be 
entered into the logbook to ensure problem areas are treated 
during monthly inspections.  
MONTHLY INSPECTION  
1. All PCCs working in BPS facilities will be familiar with 
the BPS IPM protocol.  
2. Prior to the start of any service, the PCC will report to 
the main office and review the IPM logbook for recent 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-10 
Page 3 of 7 
 
entries. 
3. The PCC will conduct a monthly inspection of all school 
buildings. The minimum inspection will include a 
physical inspection and assessment of the following 
areas, noting IPM related deficiencies:  
a. Food prep and storage areas  
b. Dumpster and waste storage areas  
c. Loading and receiving areas  
d. Building grounds  
e. Teacher’s lounge  
f. Entry points or connections from a mechanical 
space or crawl space  
g. Boiler room area, mechanical rooms, and 
moveable storage areas  
h. Storage rooms, sinks, and custodial storerooms  
i. Noted rooms with recent complaints (those 
areas/rooms marked with a complaint after the 
last service call)  
j. Other suspected areas  
4. Temporarily seal all potential rodent access holes or 
voids (< 3 in. diameter), including voids around pipes 
and duct penetrations or any other penetrations. The 
PCC will only use approved sealants. The PCC will 
provide product specifications for sealants prior to any 
use in BPS facilities. The Alterations and Repairs 
supervisor will be contacted to permanently seal any 
penetrations.  
5. The PCC will vacuum any rodent droppings around any 
area where traps, glue boards, monitoring stations, etc. 
have been placed.  
6. The PCC will inspect the above noted areas and make 
recommendations for enhanced treatment as 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-10 
Page 4 of 7 
 
necessary.  
7. The PCC will provide electronic copies of any IPM 
inspection, treatment, or service via email to the 
school’s email address, to the environmental supervisor 
or specialist with BPS and Food Services.  
The pest control contractor or the school will notify and seek 
approval from BPS Environmental Division for any additional IPM 
treatments, service calls, or inspections beyond the monthly 
treatment. This request must be made through or verified by 
email confirmation.  
A quality IPM program must effectively control the following 
conditions:  
• Rodent entry points and access  
• Harborage and clutter  
• Food source and sanitation  
• Moisture  
The IPM coordinator must review the IPM logbook immediately 
following each inspection. The coordinator will create a work 
order request addressed to the environmental supervisor for 
treatment or necessary repairs.  
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-10 
Page 5 of 7 
 
Clutter is a major issue that needs to be addressed for an 
effective IPM program. Clutter creates harborage for pests 
and limits full treatment. Clutter is defined as storage 
which:  
1. Impedes egresses  
2. Limits safe movement throughout the area  
3. Blocks and limits access to essential mechanical, utility, 
and emergency equipment  
4. Becomes stagnant: boxes or materials left on the floor 
that show signs of deterioration, water damage, or pest 
activity  
All unnecessary unwanted or contaminated materials must be 
removed. 
BED BUG PROTOCOL FOR BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS  
Bed bugs are becoming a more common pest problem that 
could impact the general quality of life but are not known to 
transmit any diseases. Bed bugs are small (less than ¼ inch in 
diameter), brownish, flattened insects that are known to bite 
people when they are asleep. The bites often may not be felt but 
can cause itchiness and swelling. Unlike some other insects (e.g., 
head lice), bed bugs do not live on people but may hitchhike on 
one’s personal items (backpacks, clothing, books, etc.) to get into 
a school building. Bed bug infestations are uncommon in 
schools, but since they may get in by other means, schools need 
to be proactive.  
School’s Response Actions:  
1. The school’s IPM coordinator, principal, or head of 
school must be notified.  
2. Write the complaint in your school’s IPM logbook 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-10 
Page 6 of 7 
 
which is kept in your main office. Please provide details 
in your complaint without divulging anyone’s personal 
information. A complaint should be logged for any 
suspect bed bugs. 
3. Contact the Facilities Management, Environmental 
Division at 617-635-8300.  
4. If you can capture the insect, place it in a sealed clear 
plastic bag (Ziploc) for identification. The pest control 
contractor (PCC) will come by to identify the insect as 
soon as possible.  
5. If a student has been identified with a bed bug, the 
personal belongings of all students in the room should 
be bagged and sealed tightly.  
6. A student who has suspect bite marks should see the 
school nurse as soon as possible.  
7. The school nurse will contact the student’s parent or 
guardian to provide them with contact information for 
the Boston Public Health Commission to arrange a bed 
bug inspection.  
For more information, please visit the link below:  
https://bphc.org/whatwedo/healthy-homes-
environment/Documents/bedbug_fact_sheet. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-10 
Page 7 of 7 
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES  
ACTIVITY  
TIMELINE 
Copy of this year’s Superintendent’s 
Circular included in IPM book 
Annually by October 1 
Pest control contractors will annually 
review and update indoor and outdoor 
IPM plans, register with 
Massachusetts Department of 
Agricultural Resources, and submit to 
Facilities Management. 
Annually by December 1 
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner:  
Sr. Environmental Supervisor 
Department:  
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address:  1216 Dorchester Avenue, Dorchester MA, 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-8300 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-18 
Version 01 
 
SCIENCE SAFETY IN SCHOOL LABORATORIES AND 
CLASSROOMS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Boston Public Schools (BPS) has developed a Science Safety Plan 
to promote a safer and more effective learning environment for 
students and a healthier workplace for teachers and other 
employees within science classrooms and laboratories in Boston 
Public Schools. The Science Safety Plan is a comprehensive effort 
to address chemical use, storage, and disposal procedures, as 
well as the prevention and/or minimization of and response to 
chemical spills and other accidents.  
The districtwide plan addresses the needs of all BPS science 
classes and is consistent with the requirements of the U.S. 
Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration’s (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1450 Occupational 
Exposures to Hazardous Chemicals in Laboratories for the 
protection of our students and employees, as well as guidance 
materials from the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), 
the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH), and the Boston Fire Department. The Science Safety 
Plan promotes a culture of safety in science and the safe 
operation of all science laboratories for students, faculty, and 
staff.  
To ensure that all students and their teachers work in an 
environment which is safe, it is necessary to formulate standard 
procedures and requirements for all schools and their personnel. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-18 
Page 2 of 8 
 
The Science Safety Plan and this circular will be reviewed 
annually. 
Your performance of these procedures is required. 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF PRINCIPALS/HEADS OF SCHOOLS 
1. 
Ensure that all science classes and laboratories are 
assigned to and conducted in appropriately equipped 
Science Rooms. 
2. 
Provide a list of all science teachers/teachers of science to 
the Science Department by October 1st each year using 
the form provided in Appendix R of the BPS Science 
Safety Plan. 
3. 
Appoint a Science Safety Coordinator (SSC) and ensure 
they:  
a) Attend the mandatory Chemical Safety Training 
session co-hosted by the Science Department and 
Flinn Scientific. 
b) Conduct an annual chemical inventory.  
c) Complete the required safety checks as stated in 
Sections J and O of the BPS Science Safety Plan. 
4. 
Inform the staff and students in writing of the safety 
standards and procedures, including the need to wear 
eye protection devices. 
5. 
Ensure that workable fire extinguishers, blankets, safety 
showers, and eyewash equipment are readily available 
and that appropriate personnel receive training in the use 
of each. 
6. 
Ensure staff review and implement the BPS Science 
Safety Plan. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-18 
Page 3 of 8 
 
7. 
Ensure that staff has instructed all students in safety 
standards and procedures, including the BPS Science 
Safety Plan and the School Safety Plan. 
8. 
Post building evacuation procedures in classrooms, 
laboratories, and chemical storage rooms. 
9. 
Conduct quarterly fire drills. 
10. 
Maintain adequate lighting and proper ventilation in 
laboratories and classrooms, and report problems to 
Facilities Management immediately. 
11. 
Be sure that teacher evaluations reflect the 
implementation of safety standards and procedures. 
12. 
Ensure that a "Right to Know" workplace notice is posted 
in the school's Science Rooms pursuant to Mass. Gen. 
Laws c. 111F. 
13. 
Ensure a copy of all safety data sheets (SDSs) is 
maintained in the main office and chemical storage areas. 
14. 
Ensure that all instructors working with toxic or 
hazardous substances receive training as specified in 
Chapter 111F of the Massachusetts General Laws through 
the Science Department. 
15. 
Notify the Science Department of any accident or injury in 
a Science Area. 
16. 
Submit the Annual Hazardous Material Permit 
Application to Boston Fire Department and post the 
current permit in the main office. 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-18 
Page 4 of 8 
 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF TEACHERS 
1. 
Review and implement the Science Safety Plan, including 
SOPs for general laboratories, chemical use and storage, 
chemistry laboratories, biology laboratories, physics 
laboratories, and waste management. 
2. 
Attend annual safety training(s) including science safety 
and first aid. 
3. 
Practice safety procedures and serve as the model for 
good safety conduct for students. 
4. 
Establish a Student Safety Contract with each student 
prior to any laboratory activities. 
5. 
Require the use of appropriate personal protective 
equipment. 
6. 
Avoid accidents by insisting that students dress properly 
for the laboratory. 
7. 
Supervise students at all times. Under no circumstances 
shall a teacher leave students unsupervised in a 
laboratory or chemical storage room. If an instructor must 
leave the laboratory in an emergency, they must: 
a) Arrange for a qualified teacher as a replacement, OR 
b) Relocate students to a properly supervised area, 
c) Lock the laboratory, and 
d) Shut off equipment. 
8. 
Inspect fire extinguishers monthly and safety showers 
and eyewash stations weekly (SSC or science teacher in 
charge). 
9. 
Maintain first aid kit in an easily accessible area (SSC or 
science teacher in charge). 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-18 
Page 5 of 8 
 
10. 
Maintain a chemical inventory using the online 
ChemVentory system, update at least annually, and 
submit an electronic copy to the Science Department and 
Facilities Management by October 1st each year (SSC or 
science teacher in charge). 
11. 
Ensure SDSs for all chemicals are accessible and copies 
are kept in the chemical storage room or school’s Science 
Department and in the administrative main office (SSC or 
science teacher in charge). 
12. 
Store all chemicals in their compatible chemical families. 
13. 
Keep all chemical storage rooms or cabinets locked at all 
times when not in use. 
14. 
Label all chemical storage rooms/cabinets and laboratory 
doors with the appropriate NFPA Diamond (SSC or 
science teacher in charge). 
15. 
Ensure all chemical and waste containers are labeled 
appropriately and stored safely until they can be 
removed. Contact Facilities Management for removal. 
16. 
Implement the appropriate emergency procedure, waste 
disposal, spill cleanup, evacuation routes, and fire 
emergency notification when needed. 
17. 
Consult with the Science and/or Facilities Management 
Department staff as appropriate regarding the use of 
Class 1A flammables, compressed gasses, donated 
chemicals, and the implementation of any laboratory 
experiment that may be more hazardous than those 
contained in the district-identified curriculum. 
18. 
Report all accidents and injuries to the principal/head of 
school and direct supervisor. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-18 
Page 6 of 8 
 
19. 
Report lighting, ventilation, safety equipment, and 
laboratory disrepair to principal/head ofschool, direct 
supervisor, and Facilities Management. 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF STUDENTS 
1. 
Practice good chemical hygiene habits. 
2. 
Maintain an awareness of health and safety hazards and 
report unsafe practices and conditions to the teacher. 
3. 
Report all accidents and injuries to the teacher 
immediately.  
4. 
Know and follow emergency procedures.  
5. 
Notify the teacher of any sensitivity or allergy to 
chemicals. 
6. 
Wear appropriate apparel and personal protective 
equipment, including goggles, during laboratory 
activities.  
7. 
Conduct all activities according to teacher instructions to 
ensure the Science Safety Plan is followed.  
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 
Facilities Management and BPS district Science Department will 
provide all schools with technical assistance in improving and 
maintaining safety procedures. Facilities Management and Safety 
personnel are available to coordinate fire prevention activities 
and building and safety equipment inspections. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-18 
Page 7 of 8 
 
Contact:   
• Chief Environmental Technician, Facilities Management 
 
617-635-8300 
• Assistant Superintendent, Office of Teaching and Learning 
617-635-8079 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Sr. Environmental Supervisor 
Department: 
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 
1216 Dorchester Ave., Boston, MA 02108 
Phone: 
617-635-8300 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
OR 
Owner: 
Science, Technology, and Engineering 
Department 
Department: 
Office of Teaching and Learning 
Mailing Address: 
Campbell Resource Center, 1216 Dorchester 
Ave., Boston, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-8750 
Email: 
bpssciencematerials@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-18 
Page 8 of 8 
 
Additional contacts in the Office of Teaching and Learning: 
Chief of Teaching and 
Learning 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
Executive Director of STEM OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
Program Director, High 
School Science 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-12 
Version 01 
 
 
 
LOSS OR DAMAGE RESULTING FROM FIRE, THEFT, 
VANDALISM OR UNLAWFUL ACTS  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
In all cases of loss or damage to Boston School Department 
buildings, grounds, or other property, heads of school, principals, 
and responsibility center managers must complete Form A 
(attached) and follow prescribed procedures upon the discovery 
of such incidents. Form A is to be used to report all acts of fire, 
theft, vandalism, destruction of property, graffiti, breaking and 
entering, and attempts to break and enter. Vandalism is 
considered to be all willful acts causing damage to school 
department property.  
Heads of school, principals, and other responsibility center 
managers must also contact the Boston Police or Safety Services 
and request that an official Police Department incident report 
(commonly referred to as a “1-1”) be prepared. This report serves 
as documentation that the incident has been reported to and 
logged by the Police Department. Heads of school, principals, 
and responsibility center managers should keep a copy of both 
Form A and the official police report for their records.  
The original Form A and a copy of the police report are to be sent 
to the Department of Safety Services, 213 Townsend Street, 
Dorchester, MA 02121.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-12 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
 
Additional copies are to be forwarded to the following 
departments:  
● Facilities Management  
● Academic Superintendents  
● Others, as necessary 
 In the event of emergency or hazardous conditions, notify 
Facilities Management immediately.  
Refer to Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 School Safety / 
Contingency Plans for additional information.  
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner:  
Sr. Supervisor Electrical/Security 
Department:  
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address:  1216 Dorchester Ave., Boston, MA 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-8300 
Fax:  
617-635-7855 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent  
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-12 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
 
FORM A 
REPORT OF LOSS OR DAMAGE RESULTING FROM 
FIRE, THEFT, VANDALISM OR UNLAWFUL ACTS 
This form is to be used to report all acts of fire, theft, vandalism, 
destruction of property, graffiti, breaking and entering, or attempts to 
break and enter. Vandalism shall be considered to be all willful acts 
causing damage to school property. 
School or other facility: ________________________________________________  
Date of report: ________________________________________________________  
Specific location of incident:  __________________________________________  
Point of entry:  ________________________________________________________  
Name of person who discovered the incident: _________________________  
Date/time of incident: _________________________________________________  
Description of damage or loss. Identify property by manufacturer, 
model, serial number, and school department identification number:  
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-12 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
 
Please complete the following information if this report is the result of 
loss, theft, or damage to a laptop/desktop. Once completed, forward a 
copy to your Technical Support Teacher (TST).  
 
Product  
Model  
Serial #  
Asset Tag # 
☐ Laptop 
 
 
 
☐ Laptop case 
 
 
 
☐ Cables 
 
 
 
☐ Lock 
 
 
 
☐ Desktop Monitor 
 
 
 
☐ Desktop CPU 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________   ______________________  
 
Name of responding Police Officer  
 
CC Number  
_______________________________________________   _______________________  
 
Name of Facilities Mgt. personnel notified         
Date/Time  
_______________________________________________   _______________________  
 
Signature  
Title  
cc:  ☐ Facilities Management Copy  
☐ Safety Services Copy  
☐ Office of Instructional and Information Technology  


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-01 
Version 01 
 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF CUSTODIANS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version.  
The purpose of this circular is to set forth the individuals 
responsible for custodian evaluations and to outline the 
philosophy, objectives, guidelines, and procedures applicable to 
the process.  
The contract between the School Committee and the Custodians 
Union provides for the annual evaluation of the performance of 
custodians by principals and heads of school. To assist in the 
implementation of the performance evaluation process, the 
Department of Facilities Management (Building Services) has 
developed a handbook for custodians, principals, and heads of 
schools. The evaluation process relates to the job duties and 
responsibilities of the position as contained in the handbook. 
It is the supervisor's responsibility to clearly communicate the 
specific duties associated with the position, in writing, to the 
custodial employee. Therefore, principals and heads of school 
should take all steps to become familiar with the contents of the 
handbook and should ensure that each custodian understands 
the content of the manual.  
Heads of school, principals, and other administrative heads are 
responsible for the evaluation of the performance of all custodial 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-01 
Page 2 of 14 
 
 
 
employees under their supervision. However, the actual 
evaluation must be done by the immediate supervisor, i.e., the 
principal/head of school is responsible for the evaluation of both 
senior and junior custodians. During the school year, all custodial 
employees, with input by the senior custodian and Facilities 
Management, will be evaluated using the diagnostic-prescriptive 
approach and the procedures and forms developed for the 
implementation thereof.  
Training on the performance evaluation process will be provided 
during the school year. Principals and heads of schools are 
encouraged to consult with the Department of Facilities 
Management (Building Services) on all performance issues 
affecting custodial employees. The evaluation process itself is 
modeled on the teacher evaluation procedures.  
PHILOSOPHY  
The Boston Public Schools recognizes that the quality of 
educational service provided depends upon the professional 
performance and total job effectiveness of all employees in the 
system. Thus, since custodial employees can and should be held 
accountable for the quality of their performance, a just and 
effective process for evaluating that performance is essential. 
True performance evaluations involve analyses of an individual's 
strengths and weaknesses, resulting in diagnoses and 
prescriptions.  This in turn leads to the desired improvement of 
skills and improved performance of the custodial employee. 
An effective performance evaluation program is one that is 
continuous rather than periodic, and organized to:  


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-01 
Page 3 of 14 
 
 
 
● Develop in the support staff a clearer understanding of the 
goals of the department or school. 
● Assist employees to address more effectively the needs of 
each school or department. 
● Encourage cooperative staff relations through mutual trust 
and respect for each employee's individual role.  
The contract with the Custodians Association further provides for 
the principal/head of school and the senior custodian to establish 
a mutually supportive relationship, and to cooperate in the 
resolution of all plant maintenance and operation problems. 
Further, the contract clearly provides that the principal/head of 
school of a school building will oversee all staff and has the 
responsibility to ensure the cleanliness and maintenance of the 
school building at all times. Each custodian in a school is 
managed by the principal/head of school of that building.  
A diagnostic-prescriptive evaluation program is positively 
directed and encourages staff to maximize unique strengths and 
skills. This evaluation program encourages staff to participate in 
the evaluation of their own performance and to help set 
objectives for self-improvement. The performance evaluation 
process, however, is not intended to be a substitute for the day-
to-day communication and supervision of employees. 
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES  
Heads of schools, principals, and other administrative heads have 
primary responsibility for the evaluation of all staff in their 
responsibility centers. After the evaluation has been presented to 
the employee, the evaluation form must be signed by the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-01 
Page 4 of 14 
 
 
 
employee (refer to the evaluation instrument) prior to submission 
to the Office of Human Capital and Office of Facilities 
Management (Building Services). Performance evaluation 
activities may include but are not limited to: 1) preliminary 
planning conferences, 2) daily observations, 3) notations, 4) 
formal interim evaluations, 5) follow-up conferences, and 6) 
recommendations to the staff member by the evaluator. 
Principals/heads of school must evaluate both senior and junior 
custodians, in writing, and sign the completed written 
evaluations.  
PROCEDURAL STEPS  
Preliminary Procedures  
Prior to the implementation of the process, the principal/head of 
school must prepare the work schedule in cooperation with the 
senior custodian(s). They should then meet with the senior 
custodian to provide an orientation to the performance 
evaluation process and to specific roles and responsibilities 
within that process for the upcoming year as contained in the 
work schedule. Principals and heads of school should seek 
technical assistance from area managers and the Department of 
Facilities Management (Building Services).  
The evaluator shall meet with the staff member for the purpose 
of explaining the diagnostic-prescriptive evaluation process, 
including a description of all components of the evaluation 
process.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-01 
Page 5 of 14 
 
 
 
Diagnosis and Prescription 
The performance evaluation process should provide each 
custodial staff member with an appraisal of the individual's 
strengths and identify areas in need of improvement. The 
employee will be evaluated on each standard within the various 
categories:  
● U - UNSATISFACTORY: The employee fails to meet the job 
description and their performance needs improvement.  
● S - SATISFACTORY: The employee meets the job description 
and their performance, as measured against this standard, is 
satisfactory.  
● G - GOOD: The employee meets and/or generally exceeds 
the standards and their performance, as measured against 
this standard, is good.  
● E - EXCELLENT: The employee exceeds standards and their 
performance as measured against this standard, is excellent.  
Every formal evaluation must result in a mark for each 
appropriate item on the performance evaluation form. In any 
area where the supervisor indicates a need for improvement, 
they will provide the employee with a written prescription. The 
diagnosis and subsequent prescription should be fully descriptive 
and instructive, suggesting specific remedies or 
recommendations for adoption by the employee. During the 
entire evaluation process, continuous administrative assistance, 
support, and encouragement should be extended to assist the 
employee in meeting established objectives. The employee may 
suggest additional or alternative prescriptions.  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-01 
Page 6 of 14 
 
 
 
Evaluation Conference  
The employee's supervisor shall meet with the staff member for 
the purpose of discussing the evaluation. During the conference, 
the staff member will be shown the written evaluation and will 
sign it to indicate that it has been seen but not to indicate 
agreement or disagreement with its contents. The staff member 
will be allowed to attach comments to the evaluation. One copy 
of the written evaluation must be given to the employee, and a 
second signed copy must be retained and filed with the assistant 
director of Facilities Management (Building Services). In any area 
that has been identified as being unsatisfactory, the 
principal/head of school should consult with the appropriate 
operational leader.  
INTERIM REPORTS  
If an unsatisfactory evaluation is issued for any item, the 
immediate supervisor must evaluate the staff member at least 
once a month until the individual's performance is judged to be 
satisfactory (see Section V).  
Principals/heads of school must submit a copy of the written 
evaluation of any employee who has received a mark of 
unsatisfactory in any item indicated on the form to the assistant 
director of Facilities Management (Building Services). 
Administrators must submit the evaluations directly to the 
assistant director of Facilities Management (Building Services).  
Any subsequent unsatisfactory evaluation must also be 
forwarded.  
➤ All evaluations must be completed by August 31 of each year. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-01 
Page 7 of 14 
 
 
 
SUMMATIVE REPORTS  
● 
At the end of each evaluation period, the principal/head of school and other administrators 
should retain copies of all evaluations and send copies to the team leader/Human Resources 
and assistant director of Facilities Management (Building Services).  
● 
If, at the conclusion of a prescriptive period (normally at the end of an evaluation period, but in 
any event at most one month after the last evaluation), the supervisor judges an employee's 
overall performance as unsatisfactory, the supervisor shall submit to the superintendent or 
designee and to the assistant director of Facilities Management (Building Services) a written 
report based on the series of evaluations.  
● 
Continued failure on the part of an employee to meet a standard will result in possible 
disciplinary action.  
PROCEDURES FOR DISCIPLINE  
If a principal/head of school determines that an employee has 
committed an infraction of work rules such as excessive 
tardiness, absences, etc., the supervisor should follow procedures 
outlined in Superintendent's Circular: Procedures Relating to the 
Discipline of Employees. Additionally, the supervisor should 
consider the infraction in evaluating the employee's overall 
performance. Principals and heads of school may issue discipline 
only up to and including letters of reprimand. The director of 
Facilities Management or other designees of the superintendent 
issue discipline beyond this level.  
Failure to address job performance problems of assigned staff 
through the performance evaluation process represents 
unacceptable performance on the part of the supervisor. This 
problem is further compounded when "problem staff” is given a 
satisfactory rating by the supervisor and encouraged to transfer 
to another school/department. Such failure on the part of a 
supervisor represents "unsatisfactory" administrative 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-01 
Page 8 of 14 
 
 
 
performance on the part of that person, who may be held 
accountable by the appropriate supervisor.  
Please refer in advance to Superintendent's Circular: Procedures 
relating to the Discipline of Employees.  
FORMS  
Performance Evaluation Report may be obtained from the Office 
of Facilities Management. Summary of significant dates and 
deadlines:  
Date  
Activity 
August 31  
Deadline for completing custodian evaluations 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner:  
Assistant Director, Building Services 
Department:  
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address:  
1216 Dorchester Ave, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-9162 
Fax:  
617-635-9306 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-01 
Page 9 of 14 
 
 
 
CUSTODIANS ASSOCIATION CONTRACT LANGUAGE 
ARTICLE XXIII 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
  
Section 1 - A diagnostic-prescriptive evaluation procedure shall 
be maintained which is reasonably related to the custodian's job 
performance using the procedure and form currently in use. 
Evaluation shall be from June 1 to May 31 for each custodian.  
Section 1A - Interim Performance Evaluation may be performed 
at the discretion of the principal/head of school and/or senior 
custodian between annual bid.  
Section 2 - Custodian Association members shall be evaluated by 
their immediate supervisors as follows: 
Evaluatee  
Evaluator  
Junior Custodian 
Principal/head of school with input by 
senior custodian and Facilities 
Management.  
Senior Custodian  
Principal/head of school with input by 
Facilities Management.  
Section 3 - No later than thirty (30) days after the start of the 
rating year, the evaluator will meet with the evaluatee for the 
purpose of explaining the diagnostic-prescriptive evaluation 
program, answering questions, and determining additional job-
related responsibilities which will be covered in the evaluation.  


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-01 
Page 10 of 14 
 
 
 
Within five (5) days after the meeting, the evaluatee will receive a 
copy of a list of job-related functions for which they are 
responsible and on which their performance will be evaluated.  
Section 4 - Within ten (10) days following the completion of the 
evaluation, the evaluator will meet with the evaluatee for the 
purpose of discussing the evaluation. At this meeting, the 
evaluatee will be shown their written evaluation and will sign it to 
indicate having seen it, but not to indicate agreement or 
disagreement. A copy of the evaluation will be provided to the 
evaluatee. The evaluatee shall be allowed to attach their 
comments to the evaluation. The evaluatee whose overall 
performance has been judged unsatisfactory will be so notified in 
writing and will meet directly with the evaluator. There will be a 
space for the principal/head of school to sign the evaluation and 
attach comments to it, if any.  
Section 5 - In any area where the evaluator indicates a need for 
professional improvement, they will provide the evaluatee with a 
specific written prescription.  
Section 6 - Continued failure to meet a standard will result in 
warnings, additional evaluations, and further action.  
Section 7 - An overall evaluation of unsatisfactory shall be subject 
to the grievance and arbitration procedure.  
Section 8 - The committee will comply with state and federal 
laws concerning confidentiality and privacy of evaluations. 
 
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-01 
Page 11 of 14 
 
 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION — CUSTODIAL  
DATE: _____/_____/__________  
NAME: ___________________________________________________________  
SCHOOL:  ________________________________________________________  
(Building staffed according to formula):        Yes _______ No _______  
Senior ______ Junior ______ Days ______ Nights ______ Grade  _______  
 
E - Excellent      
G - Good        
S - Satisfactory        
U - Unsatisfactory  
QUALITY  
1. Work performed is of an acceptable nature and level.   
 
E ☐  
G ☐  
S ☐  
U ☐  
QUANTITY  
 
2. Completes work in a reasonable time.                
 
E ☐  
G ☐  
S ☐  
U ☐  


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-01 
Page 12 of 14 
 
 
 
ATTITUDES  
 
3. Knows the tasks to be completed and organizes them.   
 
E ☐  
G ☐  
S ☐  
U ☐  
4. Learns and applies new ideas and techniques.  
 
 
E ☐  
G ☐  
S ☐  
U ☐  
5. Shows interest in work.  
 
 
E ☐  
G ☐  
S ☐  
U ☐  
6. Accepts responsibility related to work performed.   
 
E ☐  
G ☐  
S ☐  
U ☐  
DEPENDABILITY 
 
7. Continues to work in absence of supervision.   
 
E ☐  
G ☐  
S ☐  
U ☐  
8. Complies with reasonable written and oral instructions.  
 
 
E ☐  
G ☐  
S ☐  
U ☐  
ATTENDANCE   
9. Maintains good attendance.   
 
E ☐  
G ☐  
S ☐  
U ☐  
10. Maintains contracted hours of work.  
 
 
E ☐  
G ☐  
S ☐  
U ☐  
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-01 
Page 13 of 14 
 
 
 
SUPERVISORY SKILLS (APPLIES TO SENIORS ONLY)  
11. Plans and directs work to others.  
 
E ☐  
G ☐  
S ☐  
U ☐  
12. Guides the group to reasonable effectiveness.  
 
 
E ☐  
G ☐  
S ☐  
U ☐  
13. Provides evaluation reports.   
 
E ☐  
G ☐  
S ☐  
U ☐  
14. Trains subordinates.  
 
 
E ☐  
G ☐  
S ☐  
U ☐  
15. Attempts to settle disputes at lower level.  
 
 
E ☐  
G ☐  
S ☐  
U ☐  
Signatures: 
  
  
 
  
  
Principal/Head of School/Admin 
 Date 
 Comments 
 
  
  
Senior Custodian 
 Date 
 Comments 
 
  
  
Junior Custodian 
 Date 
 Comments 
 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-01 
Page 14 of 14 
 
 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION — CUSTODIAL 
 
DIAGNOSIS AND PRESCRIPTION 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular  
NUMBER: 
FMT-09 
Version 01 
 
 
 
MATERIAL DISTRIBUTION PROCEDURES  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
INDIVIDUAL OR SPECIAL PURCHASE ORDERS FOR DELIVERY TO 
THE MATERIAL DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Individual or special orders are delivered to users as requested by 
department heads. Copies of the purchase order must be 
forwarded to the Distribution Center before the material arrives 
or it may be refused; if accepted, it may be confused with other 
individual orders and sent to the wrong department. Freight 
carriers are required to schedule their deliveries with the 
Distribution Center. Failure to notify the Distribution Center 
before making a delivery may result in your order being refused, 
especially during the period between August 1 and November 15 
when storage space is at a minimum. All orders shipped to the 
Distribution Center should have an “Attention To:” block which 
indicates a person or department to which the material is being 
shipped; this is very important. You can stipulate an “Attention 
To:” address on your original requisition entered on PeopleSoft.  
CUSTODIAL ORDERS  
Custodial requisitions are submitted on two forms developed by 
Distribution and the Facilities Management Department. The first 
form is an annual order form which lists all custodial items 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-09  
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
 
authorized for delivery to schools. This form is delivered to each 
school on an annual basis in June/July. The second form is a bi-
monthly (every 2 months) “short” form which is delivered to 
schools each bi-monthly except those months when the large 
annual form is used. Custodians are required to complete these 
forms and return them to the Distribution Center. All forms 
should be emailed to  warehouse@bostonpublicschools.org or 
faxed to the Distribution Center at 617-635-8581. All orders which 
are not a part of regular bi-monthly cycles must be submitted 
and approved by Facilities Department custodial area managers.  
REQUIRED DATA 
Department head signatures, shipping location, and “Attention 
To” are required on all requests; if any of these items are missing, 
your requests could be delayed or may ship to the wrong 
department.  
Please call the Distribution Center at 617-635-8745 if you have 
special requirements or problems, or fax us at 617-635-8581, or 
email warehouse@bostonpublicschools.org. 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-09  
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
 
Owner: 
Executive Director of Facilities 
Department: 
Facilities Management  
Mailing Address: 
1216 Dorchester Avenue, Dorchester, MA 
02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9170 
Fax: 
617-635-9252 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-03 
Version 01 
 
RENOVATIONS TO SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND YARDS – 
EXTERNAL FUNDING 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
To guarantee that all work performed on School Department 
property conforms to district standards, building and life safety 
codes, and other requirements, the following procedure has been 
established for external funding sources, particularly those that 
are not processed through the PeopleSoft Financial System, i.e., 
Boston Educational Development Foundation (BEDF). 
RENOVATIONS VS. REPAIRS 
The following table lists projects that fall under the category of a 
renovation or a repair or maintenance, as well as the sequence to 
follow for each: 
 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-03 
Page 2 of 9 
 
Renovations 
Repairs & Maintenance 
Type 
Process 
Type  
Process 
Major renovations 
or improvements 
Alterations that 
are required due 
to programmatic 
changes 
Alterations of 
existing spaces 
(wall up/wall 
down) 
Toilet room 
renovations 
 
Submit a 
REQUEST FOR 
SPACE MODIFI-
CATIONS 
General 
repairs (i.e., 
broken glass, 
broken 
locks/hardw
are, graffiti, 
leaks from 
plumbing or 
roof)  
Submit a 
WORK 
REQUEST 
 
To properly plan resources and budget, requests for renovations 
for the coming school year must be initiated by the requester by 
no later than December 1 of the previous school year. Requests 
received after this deadline may not be approved.  
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-03 
Page 3 of 9 
 
Requests for renovations or alterations to school buildings and 
yards must follow the sequence outlined below: 
1. Complete the form. 
2. Submit a request through Asset Essentials; choose 
‘Modification of Space’ as the work type and attach the form 
to the work order. 
3. A confirmation of receipt is sent to the person submitting 
the request. 
4. Form and Asset Essentials request are reviewed by a cross-
functional team to determine next steps: 
a. Planning and Analysis verifies that the request is in 
alignment with current and future space requirements. 
b. Finance determines that there are not financial issues 
or challenges for the request. 
c. Facilities Management determines feasibility of 
requests only after steps 1 and 2 have been completed. 
5. After the request has been reviewed, it will determine if and 
when the work can be completed. 
6. A follow-up email will be sent to the school leader, 
requester, and school superintendent to provide status and 
timeline of request. Please note: Not all projects will be 
approved. 
7. Once approved, Facilities Management will engage to 
establish a plan within the timeline identified. 
Project requests that do not comply with this process will not be 
considered. 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-03 
Page 4 of 9 
 
The Office of Facilities Management / Planning & Engineering 
must review and approve all plans for improvements to any 
school buildings and yards. 
EXTERNAL FUNDING 
It also strongly recommended that a school communicate with 
the Director of Facilities Management prior to submitting grant 
funding applications, or seeking any other material support that 
may require alterations and/or additions to a schools’ facilities.  
Applicants should first receive acceptance from the director of 
Facilities Management of Facilities Management’s willingness to 
participate in implementation contingent on the school’s 
successful grant application/funding etc.  Principals/heads of 
school, and community school directors must include the 
director of Facilities Management in the drafting of plans that 
would require any form of alteration, addition, repair, and/or 
connections to any building services or location on the property 
of the school. The director of Facilities Management will submit 
the plans, specifications, and/or product data to the appropriate 
Planning and Engineering staff for review and approval of all 
proposed plans, specifications, product data, warranties, and/or 
maintenance agreements. 
This process will ensure that there is a thorough review of the 
proposed renovation, alteration, addition, repair, and/or 
connection to existing building systems, including the materials 
used, quality of workmanship, fairness in pricing, and contractors 
ability to complete the proposed project; and that the contractor 
performing the work has the proper insurance coverage 
(including but not limited to Worker’s Compensation, General 
Liability, and Property Damage). 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-03 
Page 5 of 9 
 
A Request for Facilities Improvement Form (Attachment A) 
should be filled out and forwarded to Planning & Engineering, 
1216 Dorchester Avenue, Boston, MA 02125. No work will proceed 
without the final approval of the Office of Facilities 
Management/Planning and Engineering Division. 
Request for Space Modification Form 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Executive Director of Facilities 
Department: 
Facilities Management  
Mailing Address: 
1216 Dorchester Avenue, Dorchester, MA 
02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9170 
Fax: 
617-635-9252 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-03 
Page 6 of 9 
 
ATTACHMENT A 
OFFICE OF FACILITIES MANAGEMENT 
REQUEST FOR FACILITIES IMPROVEMENT 
 
Date: _____________________________________________________________  
School: ___________________________________________________________  
Address: __________________________________________________________  
Contact: __________________________________________________________  
Telephone: _______________________________________________________  
Project Title:  _____________________________________________________  
Funding Sources: _________________________________________________  
Budget Year _____________Org. __________ Fund Code  _____________  
Program Account ________ Sub Class _______ Proj./Grant  __________  
Expense Object __________ 
Proposed Implementation Date: _________________________________  
Project Description and Justification (attach a sketch): 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-03 
Page 7 of 9 
 
Please return this form to: 
Brian Forde, Executive Director 
Office of Facilities Management 
1216 Dorchester Avenue 
Dorchester, MA 02125 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-03 
Page 8 of 9 
 
(For Planning & Engineering Use Only) 
PROJECT COST ESTIMATES: 
A. OPM Fee (projects over $1,500,000): ____________________ 
B. Design Fee (if needed): _________________________________ 
 
C. Construction Costs:  ____________________________________ 
D. Contingency (A+B+C x 15%): ____________________________ 
 
TOTAL COST (A+B+C+D): __________________________________ 
 
ESTIMATED PROJECT TIMELINE: 
Owner's Project Manager Selection: ______________________ 
 
Submit CB-04 __________________________________________ 
Advertise RFP: _________________________________________ 
RFP Due: _______________________________________________ 
Interviews: _____________________________________________ 
Award: _________________________________________________ 
Designer Selection: _______________________________________ 
 
Submit CB-04: _________________________________________ 
Advertise RFP: _________________________________________ 
RFP Due: _______________________________________________ 
Interviews: _____________________________________________ 
Award: _________________________________________________ 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-03 
Page 9 of 9 
 
Bidding & Construction: 
Advertise Filed Sub Bids: _______________________________ 
Advertise General Bids: _________________________________ 
Filed Sub Bids Due: ____________________________________ 
General Bids Due: ______________________________________ 
Award Contract: ________________________________________ 
Construction Start: _____________________________________ 
Completion Date: ______________________________________ 
MAINTENANCE PLAN: 
Required Annual Maintenance: ___________________________ 
 ___________________________________________________________ 
 ___________________________________________________________ 
Costs: _____________________________________________________ 
Maintenance Schedule: ___________________________________ 
 
Prepared by: ________________________________Date: _______________  
Approved by: _______________________________Date: ________________  
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
FMT-15 
Version 01 
 
 
 
ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL INSPECTION/AUDIT 
PROGRAM 
CONDUCTED BY BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS & BOSTON 
PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION 
 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
POLICY 
To fully meet the intent and requirements of the City of Boston’s 
Indoor Air Quality Ordinance (7.12.1-4), Boston Public Schools 
(BPS) and the Boston Public Health Commission (BPHC) have 
designated an Indoor Air Quality Unit which shall ensure that a 
minimum of two facility inspections per occupied school building 
are completed on an annual basis. A report with an assessment 
of conditions at each site will be developed by BPS and BPHC 
and presented to school principals/heads of schools and 
published on the BPS website annually.  
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
The Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) Unit responsible for completing the 
annual BPS environmental inspections/audit (inspection) will be 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-15 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
comprised of representatives from BPS Facilities Management’s 
Environmental Division and the BPHC’s Office of Environmental 
Health.  
The IAQ Unit will conduct two inspections of each occupied BPS 
owned or operated building during the academic school year. 
The inspections will begin after the beginning of the academic 
school year and will be completed by the end of the academic 
year of the following year. An environmental audit will be done by 
the BPS and the BPHC. 
The inspection report will investigate and note environmental 
conditions in each report. The inspectors will test and look for 
health and safety conditions throughout the interior and exterior 
of each building including but not be limited to: general 
sanitation and housekeeping; water-staining, leaks, and mold; 
general building repair; signs of pest infestation and activity; 
general life safety; unobstructed means of egress; bathroom 
sanitation, hygiene, and operability; general ventilation, etc.  
Upon completion of the annual environmental inspection, 
Facilities Management will immediately address critical health 
and safety deficiencies by filing a work order with the appropriate 
division. They will incorporate other needed work at the school 
sites into the annual budgeting process. On an ongoing basis, 
Facilities Management will provide technical assistance to 
principals/heads of schools on environmental problems and 
other building-related issues.  
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-15 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
September  Environmental inspections will begin after the 
beginning of the academic school year. 
Ongoing  
Principals/heads of schools will receive a detailed 
inspection report following completion of the 
building inspection. 
June  
Environmental inspections of all school buildings 
will be completed by the end of the academic year. 
August 31 
 
Environmental inspection reports to be posted on 
the BPS website (linked from 
https://www.bostonpublicschools.org/domain/175) 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Sr. Environmental Supervisor 
Department: 
Facilities Management  
Mailing 
Address: 
1216 Dorchester Avenue, Dorchester, MA, 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-8300 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
                                                                                           Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-08 
Version 01 
 
 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS RECYCLING AND ZERO 
WASTE GUIDELINES   
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
BACKGROUND 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts and City of Boston seek to 
minimize waste by reducing, reusing, and recycling. State policies 
and programs such as the Environmentally Preferable 
Purchasing Policy, MassDEP’s Waste Ban Regulations, and 
Executive Order 484 – Leading by Example, and the City of 
Boston Zero Waste Plan are helping state agencies and 
municipalities create healthier buildings and cleaner 
communities while simultaneously reducing costs. Boston Public 
Schools (BPS) has been actively recycling for over a decade. By 
reducing the amount of resources we use and waste we produce, 
we are creating a healthier and more sustainable Boston Public 
Schools. 
BPS is committed to Zero Waste because: 
• Recycling is a core component of the City of Boston's 
commitment to zero waste. 
• Recycling is free for BPS, while trash is an operational cost 
for BPS. School recycling is picked up curbside for free by 
Boston Public Works Department (PWD) as part of the PWD 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
 
Residential Recycling program. School trash is picked up at 
a cost by a contracted waste hauler. Increasing recycling 
while reducing trash decreases BPS operating costs, funds 
which could otherwise be directed to teaching and learning. 
• School zero waste programs mitigate clutter. Clutter 
attracts pests, creates asthma triggers like dust, and takes 
up valuable school space that could otherwise be used for 
teaching, learning, and organized storage. 
• School zero waste programs create hands-on learning and 
engagement opportunities for students and staff. A 
successful zero waste program incorporates education and 
collaboration. 
• The principles of zero waste – redesign/rethink, refuse, 
reduce, repurpose, reuse, recycle – teach us responsibility for 
our schools and our waste. 
 POLICY 
The intent of this BPS Zero Waste Policy is to reduce the amount 
of waste generated by building occupants and reduce the 
amount of non-recyclable waste that is hauled to and disposed of 
in landfills or incineration facilities. Boston Public Schools has 
created this policy which aligns with the City of Boston’s Zero 
Waste Plan. 
Boston Public Schools is responsible for providing recycling 
equipment, education, and cardboard hauling services to all 
buildings operated by BPS, and for ensuring that banned 
materials are separated from trash at the school and other 
building sites, according to MassDEP’s Waste Ban Regulations 
(310 CMR 19.017). The City of Boston Public Works Department is 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
 
responsible for providing curbside hauling services for all BPS 
single-stream recycling. 
School principals/heads of schools, and custodians must ensure 
single stream recycling equipment and signage are displayed to 
collect applicable materials (cardboard, glass, metals, paper, 
plastics) and that other materials are collected and recycled 
and/or disposed of properly, including but not limited to: office 
supplies, books, textiles, yard waste, batteries, ink/toner, 
electronics, and furniture. 
Each school is responsible for identifying a zero waste champion 
who serves as the liaison to BPS Facilities Management and 
whose duties can include educating the school on recycling 
practices, advising a student recycling team, and ensuring the 
school has recycling equipment and signage provided by 
Facilities Management. The zero waste champion and custodial 
staff are encouraged to participate in the school’s Wellness 
Council to ensure that waste management is prioritized and that 
the school’s indoor environment is upheld as a healthy and clean 
place to learn and work. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
Boston Public Schools recycling and zero waste guidance and 
resources can be found at bostongreenschools.org/zero-waste. 
Please use the BPS Zero Waste Guide and BPS recycling signage. 
BPS provides the following recycling services: single stream 
(paper, metal, glass, plastic, paperboard), corrugated cardboard, 
electronic waste, furniture, books, yard waste, construction 
waste, hazardous waste, and universal waste. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
 
Recycling is a collaborative effort and will require support from 
the principal/head of school, custodians, cafeteria staff, teachers, 
students, zero waste champions, and Facilities Management. 
Schools are encouraged to form a student-led Zero Waste Team 
to help manage the single stream recycling program and keep it 
running smoothly throughout the school year. Schools are 
encouraged to host an annual recycling event to educate the 
school community about recycling best practices and announce 
any new recycling or waste management initiatives.   
For recycling to be successful across BPS, each school must: 
• Identify a zero waste champion (teacher, staff, active 
volunteer, or a staff-advised student team) to be a liaison to 
the Facilities Department and a recycling advocate in the 
school. 
• Incorporate recycling tasks into the custodial work plan. 
• Allow time for the zero waste champion and the senior 
custodian to attend any recycling training with Facilities 
Management. 
• Commit to providing ongoing education to the school 
community about recycling best practices to divert as much 
recycling material from the waste stream as possible. 
• If your school needs recycling equipment (boxes, carts, 
barrels, lids, wheels, or signage), complete and submit the 
Zero Waste Equipment Request form to request free 
equipment from Facilities Management. BPS warehouse 
staff will deliver the equipment. 
• Place recycling signage and equipment in appropriate 
places and implement updates to the program per 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
 
instruction from Facilities Management.  
• Equipment must be placed in a 1:1 ratio – one recycling bin 
next to one trash bin. 
• Classrooms and offices must have small recycling bins or 
boxes and trash bins (one of each per room). These small 
bins should be emptied into the larger recycling barrels or 
carts and trash barrels, respectively. 
• Hallways, common areas, food service areas, and 
gymnasiums should have recycling barrels or carts and 
trash barrels. Recycling barrels should be emptied into carts, 
and carts should be rolled outside to the curb before 6am on 
the day of your school recycling pick-up. You can find your 
recycling pick-up day by school address at 
https://www.boston.gov/trash-and-recycling-day-schedule-
and-search. Trash barrels should be emptied into the trash 
dumpster, which is serviced by BPS’s contracted waste 
hauler. 
RECYCLING PROCEDURES AND CONTACTS 
Zero Waste Program and Education 
• Sustainability, Energy, and Environment Program Director, 
Operations-Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org or 
617-635-9576,  or visit bostongreenschools.org/zero-waste if 
you have questions about the BPS Zero Waste Program or 
need educational materials and support. 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
 
Recycling Equipment 
• If your school needs recycling equipment (boxes, carts, 
barrels, lids, wheels, or signage), please complete the Zero 
Waste Equipment Request form to request free equipment 
from Facilities Management. BPS warehouse staff will 
deliver the equipment. Get the form at 
bostongreenschools.org/zero-waste. 
Single-stream Recycling 
• Paper, and most plastic, glass, and metal containers can be 
recycled and picked up curbside by the Public Works 
Department (PWD). Learn more at 
https://www.boston.gov/trash-and-recycling. 
• Question about a particular item? Visit the state’s 
RecycleSmartMA.org and use the Recyclopedia tool. 
• Was your curbside recycling not picked up? Call the City of 
Boston 311 or report through the 311 App. PWD will be 
notified immediately of your missed pick-up. Indicate your 
school, your address, and the issue you had with a missed 
pick-up. 
• Contact Area Manager, Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org or 617-763-1030, if you have 
questions or concerns related to the trash and recycling 
dumpsters. 
Cardboard Recycling 
• All corrugated cardboard must be separated from the 
single-stream recycling, flattened, and stacked into 
hampers for pickup, because BPS receives income for 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
 
cardboard that is put back into the recycling program. 
Cardboard is regularly collected by BPS warehouse staff, 
separately from PWD’s curbside pick-up. 
• Contact Sustainability, Energy, and Environment Program 
Director if your school needs an additional cardboard pickup 
or there were issues with the collection.  
Food Waste 
• At this time, BPS does not compost food waste. Therefore, 
all food waste should be placed into the large trash barrels. 
Food waste should never be put into any type of recycling 
bin, barrel, or cart, nor should it be put into classroom trash 
bins. By putting food waste into the large trash barrels, you 
are helping to prevent pests, spills, and odors in the 
classrooms. 
• BPS will begin implementing food waste collection and 
composting services at some schools in 2022-2023, with 
plans to add services at additional schools each subsequent 
year. 
• Contact your Food & Nutrition Services representative with 
questions about food waste. 
Reuse: Books, School and Art Materials, Sports Equipment, 
Clothing, etc. 
• Consider setting-up a “reuse station” in your school for 
unwanted school supplies that could be used by another 
person in the school. 
• Contact the Office of Academics and Professional Learning, 
bostonpublicschools.org/Domain/2439, for anything related 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
 
to unwanted books or curriculum. 
• Clothing and textiles can be placed in the Bay State Textiles 
or Helpsy boxes, which can be found at multiple school 
locations. Learn more at bostongreenschools.org/zero-
waste, including how your school can add a textiles 
recycling box to your schoolyard. 
Furniture 
• All furniture waste must be reviewed by BPS Facilities 
Management for reuse, redistribution, or proper disposal. 
• Contact Assistant Director, Building Services, Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org for any 
furniture related questions. 
Electronic (anything with a plug or cord) and Toner/Ink 
Cartridge Recycling 
• BPS OIIT manages the collection of old and recyclable IT 
equipment such as printers, monitors, computers, and TVs, 
and ink and toner cartridges. 
• Complete Form 57 and submit to OIIT. OIIT will schedule a 
vendor to pick up the items. Get the form at 
bostongreenschools.org/zero-waste. 
Universal Waste/Hazardous Waste 
• All universal waste (lamps, batteries, mercury-containing 
devices, and pesticides) and hazardous waste must be 
properly labeled and stored in the school’s accumulation 
location. 
• Contact Sr. Environmental Supervisor, Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org or 617-828-


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
 
0695, to schedule a pick-up. 
Metal Recycling 
• Contact Area Manager, Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org or 617-763-1030, to recycle 
metal furniture or scrap items. 
Yard Waste 
• Prior to accumulating yard waste, contact Head 
Groundskeeper, Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org or 617-293-3889 to 
schedule a pick-up. All schoolyard waste must be bagged in 
compostable brown bags or in plastic barrels. All branches 
need to be cut into small pieces and bundled. 
Facility Alterations, Additions, Construction, and Demolition 
• Base building elements permanently or semi-permanently 
attached to the building itself, including all studs, insulation, 
doors, windows, panels, drywall, trim, ceiling panels, carpet, 
flooring material, adhesives, sealants, paints, and coatings 
should be reused or recycled to the greatest extent possible. 
Massachusetts law bans clean gypsum wallboard, concrete, 
asphalt, brick, and wood from disposal in the trash. 
• BPS Facilities Management shall coordinate with 
contractors and Public Facilities Department, when 
applicable, to ensure building repair projects are complying 
with all waste removal laws. 
  
For more information about this circular, contact: 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-08 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 
Owner: 
Sustainability, Energy, and Environment 
Program Director 
Department: 
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 
1216 Dorchester Ave, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9576 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-20 
Version 01 
 
DRINKING WATER ACCESS POLICY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
The Drinking Water Access Policy is for all water units used for 
drinking and food preparation. 
STATEMENT OF COMMITMENT 
Boston Public Schools (BPS) will safely bring online and maintain 
all school building water units used for drinking and food 
preparation. 
BACKGROUND  
By law, all students must have access to water during meals and 
throughout the school day, at no cost. BPS follows the Healthy, 
Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010, Massachusetts Legislation (H 4459) 
223(g), and Massachusetts Uniform State Plumbing Code (248 
MASS. CODE REGS. § 10.10, Table 1 (2011). 
Boston Water & Sewer Commission (http://www.bwsc.org/) is the 
Public Water System (PWS) that supplies potable water to BPS. 
BPS also upholds a bottled water contract. 
 
BPS, like all school districts, is responsible for following the 
guidance of the US Lead Contamination Control Act (LCCA). The 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 2 of 21 
 
 
 
LCCA directs the United States Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) and its state designees to assist school system 
administrators, schools, and programs, to identify and reduce or 
eliminate lead contamination in their facilities’ drinking water. 
The LCCA is an assistance-based, non-regulatory program.  
 
As a federal designee and the responsible Massachusetts agency, 
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection 
(MassDEP) is responsible for educating school/facility officials 
about the LCCA and coordinating statewide efforts to reduce or 
eliminate lead in drinking water at schools and childcare 
facilities. The Massachusetts program includes both lead and 
copper because the same mechanism that leaches lead from 
plumbing into drinking can also leach copper. Additional 
information on the MassDEP Drinking Water Program is available 
at https://www.mass.gov/lead-in-drinking-water.  
POLICY 
In accordance with the EPA’s revised 3Ts for Reducing Lead in 
Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities Toolkit 
(https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/3ts-
reducing-lead-drinking-water-toolkit), and the subsequent 
recommendations from MassDEP, BPS is committed to the 
following drinking water access policy: 
1. Annually test all water units used for drinking and food 
preparation. 
2. Deactivate any unit with test results above or equal to 15 
parts per billion (ppb) for lead and or 1,300 ppb for copper 
and implement remediation actions to reduce those levels 
to the lowest possible concentrations. Remediation actions 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 3 of 21 
 
 
 
may include, but not be limited to, daily flushing, installation 
of filtration systems, and/or replacement of drinking water 
fixtures, plumbing fixtures, and/or piping. 
3. Continue to use units with test results between 1 ppb and 15 
ppb for lead, while implementing short and long-term 
remediation actions to reduce those levels to the lowest 
possible concentrations. 
4. Communicate all test results and subsequent actions. 
5. Provide bottled water and cups for any deactivated, offline 
schools and any online schools that lack access to fountains 
in food service and medical areas. 
6. Provide drinking water access training for relevant BPS staff 
in accordance with this policy. 
DEFINITIONS 
• EPA’s 3 T’s for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water: Training, 
Testing, and Taking Action, 3Ts for Reducing Lead in 
Drinking Water | US EPA.  
• Deactivation Level, Copper:  ≥1,300 ppb  
• Deactivation Level, Lead:  ≥15 ppb 
• Water Unit: Any water fountain or food service 
equipment/fixture (e.g., food preparation sink faucets, 
kettles, tilt skillets, etc.) 
• Online School: A school building supplied by online water 
units as its primary source of drinking water. (see definition: 
Online Water Unit) 
• Online Water Unit: An active water unit, with verified lead 
and copper concentrations below deactivation levels, for 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 4 of 21 
 
 
 
drinking and/or food preparation. Concentrations are 
verified by the required testing.  
• Offline School: A school building provided with a 
commercial bottled water supply as its only source of 
drinking water. 
• Offline Water Unit: A deactivated water unit supplied by the 
PWS for drinking and/or food preparation with verified lead 
and or copper concentrations above deactivation levels.   
• Activation: A change in a water unit’s (e.g., water fountain or 
food service equipment and fixtures) status from offline to 
online due to initial installation or remediation action(s) and 
subsequent testing demonstrating the lowest possible 
concentrations for lead and copper. 
• Deactivation: A change in a water unit’s (e.g., water fountain 
or food service equipment and fixtures) status from online 
to offline. Any online water unit with elevated lead or copper 
levels above deactivation levels will be deactivated. 
Deactivated units will remain deactivated until remediation 
action(s) have been completed and the remediated unit has 
been re-tested with subsequent test levels at the lowest 
possible concentrations for lead and copper. 
• Flushing: Turning on a plumbing cold water fixture(s) and 
letting the cold water run continuously for a specified time 
frame in accordance with MassDEP protocols.   
• Daily Flushing:  For high use areas, such as fixtures used for 
food preparation (e.g., food preparation sink faucets, kettles, 
tilt skillets, etc.), BPS will adhere to MassDEP’s flushing 
guidance for schools, available at Fact Sheet – Flushing: A 
Short-Term Solution to Reduce Lead and Copper. For any 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 5 of 21 
 
 
 
online water fountain, it is recommended that the drinker 
first let the water run for 5-10 seconds before drinking, and 
this is only for precautionary measures as lead and copper 
concentrations were already verified to be below 
deactivation levels. For directly plumbed water units where 
flushing is not feasible (e.g., combination ovens, steamers, 
ice makers, etc.), filters have already been or will be 
installed.   
• Activation Flushing: BPS will adhere to a minimum flushing 
time of 20 minutes for activation of offline water units, per 
the activation protocol. 
• Remediation Action(s):  Shall include, but are not limited to 
replacement, repair, maintenance, filtration, and/or flushing 
to reduce the concentration of lead and copper to the 
lowest possible concentrations. 
 
REQUIREMENTS 
Per the Annual Testing Protocol (pg. 8), BPS Facilities 
Management Environmental Division will annually test all online 
water units used for drinking and food preparation for lead and 
copper concentrations. BPS annual testing will adhere to 
MassDEP’s guidance for sample collection procedures for schools 
and early education childcare facilities, available at the following 
link: Sampling for Lead and Copper at Schools and Childcare 
Facilities | Mass.gov. This testing protocol does not include any 
sinks used for facility cleaning or handwashing, including but not 
limited to those found in utility rooms, bathrooms, locker rooms, 
kitchens, science labs, prep rooms, and classrooms. These sinks 
are not to be used for drinking or any other consumptive purpose 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 6 of 21 
 
 
 
such as food preparation, and signage shall be posted as such. 
• In cases where concentrations of lead and or copper in any 
water unit do not exceed the lead/copper deactivation 
levels, no deactivation is needed. Test results will be 
available at: BPS Water / Boston School Water Quality. Units 
with results between 1 ppb and 15 ppb for lead will continue 
to be used, while BPS Facilities Management implements 
short or long-term remediation actions to reduce those 
levels to the lowest possible concentrations.  
• In cases where concentrations of lead and or copper in 
water units used for drinking or food preparation exceed 
the lead/copper deactivation levels, BPS Facilities 
Management and BPS Communications will enact the 
Deactivation Protocol (pg. 10), which requires BPS Facilities 
Management Plumbing Division to immediately deactivate 
only the impacted online water unit(s), and place signage 
that says “Water Shut Off. Do NOT turn on without Facilities 
Management or FNS (Food and Nutrition Services) 
Approval.” For water units used for drinking, the units will 
also be tagged with a “DO NOT DRINK”.  
• In cases where water sources are not tested for lead or 
copper (because these units are not designated for drinking 
or food preparation), signage has been conspicuously 
placed (as of September 1, 2016) near that source stating: 
“WATER FROM SINKS WILL BE USED FOR WASHING ONLY.” 
Pictures will be used in locations as needed. BPS 
principals/heads of school will designate a responsible 
person to check and ensure this signage is posted in 
bathrooms and classrooms on a regular basis. BPS Facilities 
Management will provide the signage and can be contacted 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 7 of 21 
 
 
 
for additional or replacement signage. 
• BPS will follow the Activation Protocol (pg. 12) to safely bring 
online school building water units used for drinking, food 
preparation, or medical services. 
• BPS will follow the Flushing Protocol (pg. 13) as one 
remediation practice for reducing lead levels to the lowest 
possible concentrations. 
• BPS Facilities Management will follow the Filter and Filtered 
Water Fountain Standard Operating Procedure and 
Maintenance Protocol (pg. 13) to manage all filtered water 
fountains and filters. 
• BPS Facilities Management will follow the Bottled Water 
Protocol (pg. 16), which includes providing bottled water, 
bottled water units, and cups for all offline schools, and for 
any medical or food service areas that lack access to tap 
water units in any online school. BPS Facilities Management 
will manage and track all bottled water accounts.  
• BPS Facilities Management will provide water testing results 
and any recent water-related information to BPS 
Communications for the BPS water webpage, 
http://www.bostonpublicschools.org/water and annual 
notices to the BPS community.  
• Heads of school/principals will develop a school-based plan 
for ensuring bottled water and cups are available 
continuously, without disruption, on all water coolers 
throughout the entire school day, including during 
mealtimes. Schools are responsible for calling Facilities 
Management to order water and cups, if running low before 
the existing, regular water delivery schedule. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 8 of 21 
 
 
 
• BPS Department of Health & Wellness will educate, 
promote, and communicate the importance and benefits of 
drinking water and collaborate with Facilities Management 
and Food and Nutrition Services to communicate all aspects 
of this policy to school leaders, staff, students, and school 
community. 
• In alignment with BuildBPS, BPS will integrate water 
infrastructure improvements into routine renovations and 
capital planning and develop a water infrastructure plan for 
schools that are offline with a goal of bringing all BPS 
schools online. 
IMPLEMENTATION PROTOCOLS: TESTING, MAINTENANCE, & 
ACCESS  
Annual Testing Protocol 
BPS annual testing will adhere to MassDEP’s guidance for 
Sample Collection Procedures for schools and early education 
childcare facilities, available at the following link: Sampling for 
Lead and Copper at Schools and Childcare Facilities | Mass.gov. 
How to Collect a First Draw Sample 
1. Collect the sample before any water has been used.  Water 
units must be unused for at least eight (8) hours, but not 
more than eighteen (18) hours, before testing.   
2. Sampler must wear chemical resistant Nitrile gloves while 
sampling. 
3. Complete the sample collection form during all sampling 
(Sample Custody Log - MA DEP LCCA Program or 
equivalent). 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 9 of 21 
 
 
 
4. Only use containers (250 milliliter/wide mouth) supplied by 
a certified laboratory. 
5. Containers should not be opened until you are ready to 
collect the sample. 
6. Sampling containers that have been compromised in any 
way (e.g., by being touched on the threads or the interior 
surfaces) must not be used. 
7. Keep any food and drink away from the sample and its 
container. 
8. If the fixture/faucet has an aerator at the end of the fixture, it 
should not be removed before taking samples. The sampler 
should not remove or clean any aerators prior to or during 
the collection of tap samples. Make sure no water has been 
withdrawn from the tap or water fountain, as well as from 
any adjacent taps, before the sample has been collected.   
9. Place the container under the water unit that is being 
tested and collect 250 milliliters (mL) of water.  
10. For all water units being tested, make sure you turn on the 
cold water tap. Open the cold water tap and run it as you 
would when filling a glass of water. 
11. Turn on the water and fill the container without allowing 
any water to run down the drain or the outsides of the 
container. 
12. Close the container according to the instructions from your 
certified lab. Tightly cap the sample bottle and place in the 
sample (shipping) kit provided. 
13. Make sure the container is labeled with the same 
information from your sample collection form (Sample 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 10 of 21 
 
 
 
Custody Log - MA DEP LCCA Program or equivalent). 
14. Prepare the container for shipping according to the certified 
lab's instructions. Ship containers according to the certified 
lab's instructions. 
15. Samples must be delivered and relinquished to a certified 
lab within 14 (fourteen) days of collection for proper testing. 
Deactivation Protocol 
1. In cases where concentrations of lead and or copper in any 
water unit do not exceed the lead/copper deactivation 
levels, no deactivation is needed.  Test results will be 
available at: https://www.bostonpublicschools.org/water. 
Units with results between 1 ppb and 15 ppb for lead will 
continue to be used, while BPS Facilities Management 
implements short or long-term remediation actions to 
reduce those levels to the lowest possible concentrations.  
2. In cases where concentrations of lead and or copper in 
water units used for drinking or food preparation exceed the 
lead/copper deactivation levels: 
a. Upon notification from the BPS Sustainability and 
Environmental Resources Manager, BPS Facilities 
Management Plumbing Division will immediately 
deactivate only the impacted online water unit(s), 
unless otherwise specifically directed.  These units will 
be made offline and tagged “Water Shut Off. Do NOT 
turn on without Facilities Management or FNS (Food 
and Nutrition Services) Approval.”  For water units used 
for drinking, the units will be tagged with a “DO NOT 
DRINK”. If required, a bottled water unit will be placed 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 11 of 21 
 
 
 
as near as possible to the deactivated unit. 
b. BPS Facilities Management will provide bottled water, 
bottled water coolers, and cups.  One bottled water 
cooler will be provided for each deactivated water unit 
(e.g. water fountain) or as necessary to meet 248 CMR 
10.00: Uniform State Plumbing  Code requirements 
(See: Table 1: Minimum Facilities For Building 
Occupancy, available at the following link: 248 CMR 
10.00: Uniform state plumbing code). . 
c. BPS Communications and Facilities Management will 
immediately implement the Deactivation 
Communications Protocol (pg. 18). 
d. BPS Facilities Management Environmental and 
Plumbing Divisions will inspect the impacted water 
unit to identify any source or cause of elevation and 
schedule any remediation action(s).     
e. The impacted water unit will remain deactivated until 
remediation actions have been completed and BPS 
Facilities Management Environmental Division has 
tested and received three (3) consecutive lead and 
copper sample results at the lowest possible 
concentrations. 
3. In cases where water sources are not tested for lead or 
copper (because these units are not designated for drinking 
or consumption) or levels of lead in water units exceed the 
lead/copper action level, signage has been conspicuously 
placed near that source stating: “WATER FROM SINKS WILL 
BE USED FOR WASHING ONLY.” 
4. The Boston Public Health Commission (BPHC) does not 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 12 of 21 
 
 
 
recommend that BPS screen children for lead. If a child is 
exposed to water containing elevated lead levels, the BPHC 
recommends that parents consult their child's medical 
provider to assess whether their child's individual risk 
warrants blood lead testing. Many healthcare providers, 
such as MassHealth, cover the cost of lead testing. Families 
with questions or concerns about costs may contact BPS 
Health Services at 617-635-6788. 
Activation Protocol 
1. Upon completion of any water unit’s remediation action 
(e.g., replacement, repair, etc.), Facilities Management 
Environmental Division will flush each water unit for 
approximately 20 minutes or more as needed to remove any 
visual signs of sediment, debris, and rust. BPS will adhere to 
a minimum flushing time of 20 minutes for activation of 
offline water units. 
2. Eight to eighteen (8-18) hours post flushing, a sample from 
each water unit will be collected for confirmatory analysis of 
lead and copper.  
3. Repeat step #2 two additional times to conclude three (3) 
rounds of testing. For the initial activation of a filtered water 
unit, a sample for coliform will be collected during one of 
the three rounds of testing (see New England States’ 
Sample Collection & Preservation Guidance Manual For 
Drinking Water, p. 36, New England States' Sample 
Collection & Preservation Guidance Manual for Drinking 
Water, Revision 5.0, January 2015).  
4. Upon receiving three (3) consecutive sets of sample results 
at the lowest possible concentrations and one negative fecal 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 13 of 21 
 
 
 
bacteria test per filtered water unit, BPS Communications 
and Facilities Management will immediately implement the 
Activation Communications Protocol (pg. 18). 
5. Facilities Management and the head of school/principal will 
select a date for activating the water unit(s) to go online. 
6. Once a date has been selected, the Facilities Management 
Plumbing Division will work on logistics for turning the 
water unit(s) online. Logistics will include an activation flush. 
Flushing Protocol 
1. Food services equipment and fixtures (i.e., food preparation 
sink faucets, kettles, tilt skillets, ice makers, etc.) shall be 
flushed every morning for two (2) minutes prior to the 
preparation of any food by the food service manager or 
designated food services employee. Only cold water shall be 
used for the flush and for the preparation of any food and or 
beverage. The food services manager will be responsible for 
keeping a daily log of all flushing activities.  
2. When drinking from an online fountain, it is recommended 
that the drinker first let the water run for 5-10 seconds 
before drinking. This will be communicated to the BPS 
community through the Implementation Protocols: 
Education and Training (pg. 20).  
3. Following an extended school vacation (e.g., summer 
vacation, February vacation), custodians will flush all online 
fountains prior to the restart of school. 
4. Before watering a school garden with tap water, all 
gardeners must first flush the water for 2 minutes.  


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 14 of 21 
 
 
 
Filter and Filtered Water Fountain Standard Operating 
Procedure and Maintenance Protocol 
In addition to the Annual Testing Protocol (pg. 8), BPS will collect 
samples for coliform testing of filtered online water units.  
In cases where coliform is present within filtered online water 
units: 
1. Upon notification from the BPS Sustainability and 
Environmental Resources Manager, BPS Facilities 
Management Plumbing Division will immediately deactivate 
only the impacted online water unit(s), unless otherwise 
specifically directed.  These units will be made offline and 
tagged “Water Shut Off. Do NOT turn on without Facilities 
Management or FNS (Food and Nutrition Services) 
Approval.”   
2. BPS Facilities Management will provide bottled water, 
bottled water units, and cups. One bottled water cooler will 
be provided for each deactivated water unit (e.g. water 
fountain) or as necessary to meet 248 CMR 10.00: Uniform 
State Plumbing  Code requirements (See: Table 1: Minimum 
Facilities For Building Occupancy, available at the following 
link: 248 CMR 10.00: Uniform state plumbing code).  
3. BPS Communications and BPS Facilities Management will 
immediately implement the Deactivation Communications 
Protocol (pg. 18). 
4. BPS Facilities Management Environmental and Plumbing 
Divisions will inspect the impacted water unit and schedule 
remediation action(s) (e.g., replacement of the filter). 
5. The impacted water unit will remain deactivated until 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 15 of 21 
 
 
 
remediation actions have been completed and BPS 
Facilities Management Environmental Division has received 
one (1) sample result absent of coliform per affected water 
unit.  
BPS Facilities Management will initiate and uphold a vendor 
contract to replace and maintain water fountain filters once per 
year or more as needed.  
Daily Use/Maintenance 
• Only water should be put down the drains. Anything else 
can cause clogging and lead to permanent damage of the 
unit and plumbing. 
• Custodians are responsible for wiping down the units daily. 
The units shall be cleaned using the procedures outlined for 
all high touch surfaces using food grade cleaning products. 
 
Filter Status Indicator Light 
• When the light turns yellow, the school should put in a work 
order via Asset Essentials, and select “Filter Replacement”.  
• The yellow light is just an indicator that the filter is 
approaching the end of its life and will need to be changed 
soon. The light does not indicate that the filter or water 
quality is compromised.  
• If a light turns red, please place one of the signs provided in 
your Drinking Water Binder on the unit and encourage 
occupants to utilize another unit until the filter can be 
replaced. 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 16 of 21 
 
 
 
Leaking/broken Unit 
• If the unit has been newly installed within the last year, the 
school should reach out to Audrey Ng, the Water & 
Sustainability Project Manager to have the contractor 
address the issue under warranty.  
• If the unit is not newly installed, the school should put in a 
work order via Asset Essentials to be addressed by your 
plumbing supervisor. 
• The school’s operations staff may choose to use the tools 
provided in the Water Bottle Refill Station Repair Kit to open 
and turn off the unit to stop the leaking until the contractor 
arrives. 
Bottled Water Protocol 
• BPS Facilities Management will provide bottled water, 
bottled water coolers, and cups for all offline schools, and for 
any medical or food service areas that lack access to tap 
water units in any online schools.  
• BPS Facilities Management will cease bottled water 
accounts for schools that are activated online. Bottled water 
coolers will only remain in an online school in medical or 
food service areas if those areas lack access to tap water 
units. 
• BPS Facilities Management will manage and track all 
bottled water accounts. 
• Heads of school/principals will develop a school-based plan 
for ensuring bottled water and cups are available 
continuously, without disruption, on all water coolers 
throughout the entire school day, including during meal 
times. Schools are responsible for calling Facilities 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 17 of 21 
 
 
 
Management to order water and cups, if running low before 
the existing, regular water delivery schedule. 
IMPLEMENTATION PROTOCOLS: COMMUNICATIONS & 
REPORTING 
BPS Communications is responsible for updating and 
maintaining the BPS water website at BPS Water / Boston School 
Water Quality with content support from BPS Facilities 
Management and BPS Department of Health and Wellness. BPS 
Communications will update the BPS water website to include a 
current list of online schools and the most recent annual test 
results, and a current list of offline schools. These lists must be 
updated every time a school is activated or deactivated. 
Deactivation Communications Protocol 
In cases where coliform is present or concentrations of lead and 
or copper in water units used for drinking or food preparation 
exceed the lead/copper action levels, BPS Communications and 
Facilities Management will promptly implement the Deactivation 
Communications Protocol: 
1. The school’s principal/head of school will be notified of the 
deactivation protocol and test results by email with the test 
results and a standardized letter for the school community. 
2. The letter will include the water testing results and a link to 
the BPS water website, which provides resources related to 
lead in the water. A letter template will be provided by BPS 
Communications and BPS Facilities Management, and the 
testing results will be provided by BPS Facilities 
Management. 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 18 of 21 
 
 
 
3. Any media statements will be managed by BPS 
Communications. 
Activation Communications Protocol 
Upon receiving three (3) consecutive sets of sample results below 
lead and copper action levels, and one negative fecal bacteria 
test result for filtered water units, BPS Communications and 
Facilities Management will immediately implement the 
Activation Communications Protocol: 
1. The school’s principal/head of school will be notified of the 
activation protocol and test results. 
2. The letter will include the water testing results, a link to the 
BPS water website, and details regarding any water 
infrastructure improvements (e.g., new fountains, filters, 
pipes). A letter template will be provided by BPS 
Communications and BPS Facilities Management, and the 
test results will be provided by BPS Facilities Management. 
The principal/head of school will share this information with 
the school community. 
3. BPS Facilities Management and the principal/head of school 
will select a date for activating the water unit(s) online. 
4. Once a date has been selected, BPS Facilities Management 
Plumbing Division will implement the logistics for turning 
the water unit(s) online. 
ANNUAL REPORTING 
BPS Facilities Management will provide water testing results and 
any recent water-related information to BPS Communications for 
the BPS water webpage and annual notices to the BPS 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 19 of 21 
 
 
 
community.  
BPS Department of Health and Wellness and BPS Facilities 
Management will provide annual updates to the “BPS Drinking 
Water Access Policy”, if needed. 
BPS Department of Health and Wellness and BPS Facilities 
Management will annually report on the implementation of the 
Water Policy to the District Wellness Council and subsequently 
the BPS School Committee. Following BPS School Committee 
review, this information will be shared with MassDEP. 
 
IMPLEMENTATION PROTOCOLS: EDUCATION & TRAINING 
The following BPS staff will receive annual training and 
professional development about this policy and its protocols: 
• Principals/heads of school will receive training at the Annual 
Leadership Institute as a part of Operations and/or wellness-
related sessions. 
• Food service managers and staff will receive training at the 
summer training provided by Food and Nutrition Services. 
• Custodians will receive training at summer training 
provided by BPS Facilities Management. 
• School-based staff will be trained by principals/heads of 
school at the beginning of the school year, as part of the 
school policies and procedures overview. 
• Any new Facilities Management Environmental and 
Plumbing Division staff will receive training as part of their 
onboarding process.  
BPS Department of Health and Wellness will educate, promote, 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 20 of 21 
 
 
 
and communicate the importance and benefits of drinking 
water, and collaborate with Facilities Management and Food and 
Nutrition Services to communicate all aspects of this policy to 
school leaders, staff, students, and school community. 
BPS School Wellness Councils will include water-policy related 
goals as part of their annual Wellness Action Plans. 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 21 of 21 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Sustainability, Energy, and Environment 
Program Director 
Department: 
Facilities Management  
Mailing Address: 1216 Dorchester Avenue, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9576 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Owner: 
Senior Environmental Supervisor 
Department: 
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 1216 Dorchester Avenue, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-8300 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director 
Department: 
Health & Wellness 
Mailing Address: 370 Columbia Road, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-1631 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-04 
Version 01 
 
 
 
CUSTODIAL PAY ADJUSTMENTS – CALL-IN 
PROCEDURE  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
So the Office of Facilities Management (Building Services) may 
properly adjust a custodian's pay in a timely manner, it is 
essential that you follow the payroll procedure outlined below:  
When a senior custodian is absent, you must notify Facilities 
Management (Building Services), by telephone 617-635-9162 or e-
mail (emalone2@bostonpublicschools.org) with: the name of the 
absent senior custodian; the name of the custodian covering; the 
reason for the absence; and all dates of absence, if known. 
When the absent senior custodian returns to work, Facilities 
Management (Building Services) must be notified to ensure that 
the person covering is paid for the correct number of days.  
The custodial pay period begins on Saturday and ends on Friday. 
It is a weekly payroll. If the absentee is to be out on a long-term 
basis, Facilities Management (Building Services) must be notified 
if the current acting senior should be carried forward to the next 
pay period.  
 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-04 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
 
 If a custodian is being docked for all or any part of a day, 
you must notify Beth Malone to ensure the dock is 
properly recorded. You must also notify Facilities with the 
reason for the dock (i.e., late, no show/no call, left early).  
If a custodian is at "0" balance (out of sick, personal, or vacation 
leave), they must be coded. Select Absence Name - Leave 
Without Pay, then select Absence Reason. Additional information 
should be entered in the “comments” panel.  
All docks and acting senior coverage must be reported in a timely 
manner. 
To ensure coverage in a single-person building, prior notice 
should be given to the Office of Facilities Management (Building 
Services) whenever possible. Forty-eight (48) hours’ notice is 
required for personal and compensatory days. Two weeks’ notice 
is required for vacation. 
Calls for acting senior coverage while school is in session will only 
be taken from the head of school/principal, secretary, or 
principal's designee. Custodians should call in any acting senior 
coverage during school vacations and summer months. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-04 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner:  
Assistant Director, Building Services 
Department:  
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address:  
1216 Dorchester Ave, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-9162 
Fax:  
617-635-9306 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-05 
Version 01 
 
 
 
PERMIT ACTIVITIES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
PERMIT REQUEST PROCESS FOR ALL BPS BUILDINGS 
Any activity taking place in a school building after school hours 
requires a permit, including activities during school vacation 
weeks, holidays, and summer months. 
ALL PERSONS WILL BE DENIED ACCESS TO BPS BUILDINGS IF 
NO PERMIT HAS BEEN REQUESTED AND APPROVED BY THE 
SCHOOL AND FACILITIES MANAGEMENT.  
Permits are to be electronically submitted through SchoolDude 
at least two weeks (minimum) before the event, so it is advisable 
to submit your request when the activity/event is scheduled and 
confirmed.  
For external (non-BPS) users:  
• Access link: Facilities Mgt. Community Use Monthly 
Calendar  
• Please see the CommunityUse Requester Guide for more 
information about how an outside organization accesses the 
system and submits requests.  
• Please see the FSRequester Guide, which includes video and 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-05 
Page 2 of 9 
 
 
 
picture how-to guides for submitting requests once you are 
logged in.  
For internal (BPS) users:  
• Single Sign On: From the nine-dot grid in the top right of 
your Gmail screen, click “More,” then click the SchoolDude 
icon (looks like a cartoon face).  
• SchoolDude log in screen 
• Please see How to Submit a Schedule Request, which 
includes video and picture how-to guides for submitting 
requests once you are logged in. 
• Once an organization or BPS staff member has submitted a 
request, it will be routed to the school leader or their 
designee for approval. Please see Processing Schedules for 
more information about how to manage approvals.  
If an independent third party (NOT a BPS or BPS partner 
organization) submits a permit request form to use or 
occupy school property for an event at which attendance is 
expected to exceed 60 people, or at which there is a charge 
for admission, the party shall be required to hire a School 
Police detail, at the third party’s own expense, to be present 
for the duration of their use of the property. 
Please Note: The routing process for summer will be different 
from the school year process. [See page 4 of this circular.] For 
summer programs, requests will go first to BPS Facilities, then 
the school leader will receive notification of the approval of 
building use.  


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-05 
Page 3 of 9 
 
 
 
CUSTODIAL HOURS AND OVERTIME 
The applicant is responsible for custodial overtime, utilities fees, 
and building usage fees, if applicable. Schools and other 
applicants may also be responsible for overtime if the event 
occurs before or after a building is closed, on a weekend, holiday, 
or school vacation, and/or when the building is open if additional 
custodial coverage is required, as determined by Facilities 
Management. Payment in the form of a certified check or money 
order made out to Boston Public Schools is required prior to the 
permit activity occurring.  
For all activities and events that occur when the building is 
closed, the custodian(s) will open the building one-half hour prior 
to the entrance of the applicant to the building and will close the 
building one-half hour after the applicant exits the building. 
Groups requesting building space must abide by their requested 
permit hours.  
REQUEST FOR BUILDING USE BY COMMUNITY USERS 
All the above conditions apply, with the addition that outside 
groups must pay a building usage fee. A fee is charged per 
space.  
An invoice for all Facilities Management permit fees will be sent 
by the Facilities Management Department via the SchoolDude 
building permitting system with the actual fees that the 
requester will be charged. Custodial coverage is determined by 
the number of people and the amount of space used by the 
applicant. 
Staffing Minimum 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-05 
Page 4 of 9 
 
 
 
Up to 150 people = 1 Senior Custodian  
Up to 350 people = 1 Senior Custodian and 1 Junior Custodian  
Up to 450 people = 1 Senior Custodian and 2 Junior Custodians  
 
An additional hour is added to the permit hours (one-half hour to 
open and one-half to close).  
If a custodian works overtime, principals/heads of schools should 
work with their area managers to ensure that the custodian has 
meaningful work to do (a predetermined work schedule) during 
overtime hours. Custodians are expected to remain on the school 
premises while on overtime and perform the scheduled work. 
Custodial opening and closing times (one-half hour before and 
after) are figured into the permit hours. Requesters DO NOT need 
to include this time in the request. 
GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS 
Responsibility for Use:  
• It is expressly understood and agreed that the regulations of 
the School Committee are to be strictly complied with. The 
requester/organization may refer to the BPS Superintendent 
Circulars for BPS Policies and Procedures.  
• The requester/organization assumes full responsibility for 
any injury to or loss of city property as a consequence of 
such use of the above-described accommodations and 
engages to make the same good without the expense to the 
city. The requester/organization further agrees to pay the 
charge for the light, heat, custodians, security, and other 
service as required.  
• BPS gymnasiums: Requester/organization assumes all 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-05 
Page 5 of 9 
 
 
 
responsibility for the proper use and protection of the 
facilities provided in the school. Requester/organization 
must not allow persons to use these facilities over whom 
they have no control.  
The organization, their participants, and spectators are 
prohibited from any part of the building other than the 
gymnasium. Organization shall enter the school through 
one entrance.  Entry doors are NOT to be propped open to 
allow unauthorized individuals to enter the building.  It will 
be the responsibility of the organization to station an 
individual at the designated entrance to ensure only 
participants of that program are allowed in. Once all 
participants are allowed in, all doors should be closed and 
secured. 
Supervision: The applicant/organization must provide sufficient 
supervisory personnel to ensure proper supervision for the safety 
of members/guests and regulate responsible usage. The 
organization will be responsible for all costs incurred to repair any 
damage done to the premises. Custodial employees are not 
available for supervising the premises but do have obligations 
connected with cleaning and maintenance of the building.  
Licenses: In addition to the permit required by the regulations of 
the School Committee, for any exhibition or entertainment where 
an admission fee will be required, a license under the provisions 
of Chapter 348 of the Special Acts of 1915 must be obtained. This 
license can be obtained by applying to the Mayor of the City of 
Boston and paying the required fee. No such license is required 
for entertainment in school buildings by or for the benefit of the 
pupils thereof, and under the supervision of the principal/head of 
school.  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-05 
Page 6 of 9 
 
 
 
Police Attendance: If admission is charged, the person to whom 
the permit is issued must make provisions for BPS School Police 
attendance. If a school building is occupied outside of school 
hours by third-party programs, sufficient BPS School Police 
attendance is necessary if there are sixty (60) or more persons 
occupying the facility. A BPS School Police detail is the sole 
responsibility of the renter(s). If BPS School Police are not in 
attendance, BPS Facilities Management may cancel the permit 
and exclude all persons from the building.  
Time for Filing Permit Requests: Building permit requests during 
the school year must be submitted. No definite and final 
reservations are made until (1) the request is approved by the 
principal/head of school and (2) Facilities Management has given 
final approval and activated the permit.  
Gymnasium Permit Start and End Date:  Gymnasium permits will 
begin the last week of September and end two (2) weeks prior to 
the closing of school.  
Alcohol, Smoking, and Food Regulations: According to state law, 
alcoholic beverages are not allowed in public school buildings. 
Consumption of food and/or beverages is not permitted in the 
auditorium or conference rooms. Smoking is not permitted in any 
school building.  
Payment: Personal/company checks; certified bank checks, 
and/or money orders will be accepted as forms of payment. Cash, 
credit cards, and money transfers are not accepted forms of 
payment. Any check returned for insufficient funds will be 
charged an additional $25.00. 
Right to Cancel: Heads of schools/principals reserve the right to 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-05 
Page 7 of 9 
 
 
 
request cancellation of any requested permit activity occurring at 
their facility. BPS Central Administration will make final 
determinations regarding principal/head of school cancellation 
requests. BPS Central Administration has the right to cancel any 
permit in violation of BPS building usage and/or safety policies.  
Obligation to Clean: Requester is obligated to clean and organize 
any used building space and return the building space to the 
state it was found it. If the space is not suitably cleaned and/or 
returned to the state it was in prior to use, the requester may be 
charged additional custodial and/or other fees and may lose the 
privilege of using any BPS facility in the future.  
School Closures: If schools are closed due to inclement weather 
or other emergencies, all permits are automatically 
canceled/suspended for the duration of the inclement weather or 
other emergency. Gymnasiums are not available for rental during 
holidays and Christmas, February, April, and summer vacations.  
Weekend Use:  If snow is forecast, Facilities Management cannot 
guarantee that parking lots will be cleared for scheduled events.  
Organizations are urged to contact Facilities Management to 
cancel when necessary. You may contact the area manager on 
duty through Municipal Protective Services at 617-635-4844 to 
cancel. 
PERMITS DURING SUMMER TERMS  
Permit Approval: Summer permit requests will be routed first to 
BPS Facilities. The school leader will then receive notification of 
the approval of building use. 
Permit Start and End Date: Summer programs may operate in 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-05 
Page 8 of 9 
 
 
 
BPS buildings between July 8 and August 9, 2024, with one day 
of setup to be arranged with the school leader prior to July 1, 
2024. Gymnasium permits will begin one week after the opening 
of school and end one week prior to the closing of school.  
Student and Employee Attendance: Programs operating in BPS 
buildings must record daily student and staff attendance to be 
available upon request.  
Identification: During the summer, all adults working in any BPS 
building must wear an identifying name badge indicating at 
minimum their full name and organization/program name. 
Specifications for employees working in BPS buildings during 
summer staff are as follows:  
• BPS summer staff: All BPS employees must wear their BPS 
issued ID.  
• Non-BPS summer staff hired via OHC external hiring 
process: All non-BPS summer staff must wear their BPS 
Summer ID issued by OHC at their Welcome Session.  
• Community-based program staff: Must wear a visible 
organizational ID badge every day during the program. 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS FACILITIES RENTAL FEES 
All events and functions to be held in Boston Public School 
buildings will be implemented in accordance with the following 
fee schedule. 
One Time Event ··········· $515.00/event 
Continuous Usage ······ $2,575.00 per 10 events 
Utilities  ·························· $95.00/hour 
Senior Custodian ········· $49.00/hour 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-05 
Page 9 of 9 
 
 
 
Junior Custodian ········· $37.00/hour 
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner:  
Assistant Director, Building Services 
Department:  
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 
Campbell Resource Center, 1216 Dorchester 
Ave, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-9162 
Fax:  
617-635-9306 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-19 
Version 01 
 
BPS STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE FOR 
CLEANING AND DISINFECTING BODY FLUID SPILLS  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
PURPOSE  
This standard operating procedure (SOP) will be implemented to 
ensure BPS custodians safely and properly respond to all 
incidents requiring cleaning and disinfecting of body fluid spills. 
Body fluids – including vomit, diarrhea, and blood – are 
considered potentially infectious. Employees should always treat 
any body fluid response action as potentially infectious and 
always wear proper personal protective equipment when 
cleaning and disinfecting body fluid spills.  
PROCEDURES  
1. Contain the affected area.  
● Discontinue food service operations if a spill occurred 
in food preparation or service areas.  
● Remove students and staff from the affected area or 
classroom.  
● Block off the area of the spill from staff and students 
until cleanup and disinfection are complete. For 
incidents involving vomit, contain all areas within 25 
feet of the spill.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
 
● Send sick students and staff to the school nurse.  
● Excuse (e.g., send home) food service employees with 
symptoms of vomiting or diarrhea from food service 
operations. Refer to the TFER Exclusions and 
Restrictions for Ill or Infected Food Service Employees 
for guidance. Please refer to the food service employee 
reporting agreement.  
● Allow only food service employees and/or custodial 
staff designated to clean and disinfect body fluid spills 
in the affected area.  
2. Put on personal protective equipment (PPE), including:  
● Wear disposable, non-latex gloves. Gloves should be 
vinyl or nitrile (rubber), and non-powdered.  
● Consider double-gloving (wearing two gloves on each 
hand). Replace gloves if they tear or become visibly 
soiled. Keep hands away from the face while wearing 
gloves.  
● Wear a face mask and eye protection (goggles or 
protective glasses).  
3. Remove visible body fluid. 
● Put on new disposable gloves. Consider double 
gloving.  
● Clean the affected area with soap and water, and paper 
towels and/or a disposable mop head. This includes 
surfaces that came into direct contact with body fluids 
and surfaces that may have been contaminated with 
body fluids. Before disinfecting, all surfaces should be 
thoroughly cleaned (i.e., not visibly soiled).  


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
 
● Dispose of the paper towels and/or disposable mop 
head in a plastic garbage bag.  
● Remove gloves and discard in a plastic garbage bag.  
● Wash hands.  
Food contact surfaces:  
● Put on new disposable gloves. Consider double 
gloving.  
● Clean the affected area with soap and water.  
● Rinse thoroughly with plain water.  
● Wipe dry with paper towels.  
● Dispose of paper towels in a plastic garbage bag.  
● Disinfect surfaces.  
● Prepare and apply a solution of ¾ cup concentrated 
bleach + 1 gallon of water.  
● Leave the surface wet for at least 5 minutes.  
● Rinse all surfaces intended for food or mouth contact 
with plain water before use. 
● Wipe down with sanitizing solution concentration for 
food contact surfaces to air dry.  
● Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.  
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
 
Non-absorbent surfaces (i.e., tile, stainless steel): 
● Prepare a disinfecting solution. The disinfecting 
solution shall be an EPA registered hospital grade 
disinfectant.*  
● Wear all PPE, including the face mask and eye 
protection or goggles. Ensure that area is well 
ventilated (mix solution outdoors if necessary).  
● Prepare a disinfecting solution per manufacturer’s 
recommendations immediately before applying it to 
surfaces. It is recommended that this solution be used 
on surfaces that have had any direct contact with body 
fluids.  
● Transfer solution to a spray bottle.  
● Using the spray bottle, generously apply the 
disinfecting solution to affected surfaces, including 
surfaces that came into direct contact with body fluids, 
and surfaces that may have been contaminated with 
body fluids.  
● For incidents involving vomit, disinfect all areas and 
surfaces within 25 feet of the spill.  
● Use in a well-ventilated area.  
● Disinfect high touch areas (e.g., door handles, toilets, 
dispensers, carts, sink faucets, telephones, etc.) 
throughout the food service area, cafeteria dining 
areas, break rooms, and restrooms using disinfecting 
solution and paper towels.  
● Leave the disinfecting solution on affected surfaces for 
a minimum of 5 minutes. If another EPA-approved 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
 
disinfectant is used, follow the manufacturer’s 
instructions.  
● Rinse surfaces with clean water and paper towels 
and/or a disposable mop head.  
● Allow surfaces to air dry.  
● Dispose of the paper towels and/or disposable mop 
head in a plastic garbage bag. 
● Remove gloves and dispose of them in a plastic 
garbage bag.  
● Wash hands.  
* EPA-approved disinfectants may be used instead of 
chlorine bleach solutions. EPA-approved disinfectants 
appropriate for vomit and diarrhea may be found at 
www.osha.gov/sites/default/files/publications/norovirus
-factsheet.pdf. CDC guidelines on norovirus outbreak 
management and disease prevention recommend 
using chlorine bleach solutions on hard surfaces when 
possible. EPA-approved disinfectants appropriate for 
blood may be found www.epa.gov/pesticide-
registration/selected-epa-registered-disinfectants. 
Absorbent surfaces (i.e., carpet, upholstery, cloth):  
● Disinfect with a chemical disinfectant when possible or 
remove and dispose of the affected material. The 
material will be double-bagged and disposed of 
through mainstream waste disposal.  
● Steam clean for a minimum of 5 minutes at 1700F.  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
 
● Launder in a mechanical washing machine on the 
hottest water setting, and dry in a mechanical dryer on 
a high heat setting.  
● Dispose of disinfecting materials in a plastic garbage 
bag, as appropriate.  
● Remove gloves and dispose of them in a plastic 
garbage bag.  
● Wash hands. 
4. Discard potentially contaminated food.  
● Put on new disposable gloves. Consider double 
gloving.  
● Dispose of exposed food and food in containers that 
may have been contaminated by body fluid in a 
garbage bag.  
● For incidents involving vomit, discard all food within 25 
feet of the spill. Food stored in intact, sealed containers 
(i.e., cans) may be salvaged if adequately cleaned and 
disinfected.  
● Remove gloves. Dispose of gloves in a plastic garbage 
bag.  
● Wash hands.  
5. Dispose of PPE and cleaning and disinfecting materials.  
● Put on new disposable gloves. Consider double 
gloving.  
● Securely tie garbage bags containing all of the 
disposed of materials. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
 
● Place garbage bags in a second garbage bag (double 
bag).  
● Clean all non-disposable items (bucket, mop handle, 
etc) with soap and water; then disinfect. Allow these 
items to air dry.  
● Remove PPE, including disposable gloves, and place in 
a second garbage bag.  
● Securely tie the second garbage bag.  
● Discard the bag(s) in the dumpster.  
● Remove soiled clothes, if necessary, and place clothes 
in a separate garbage bag. Securely tie the garbage 
bag. Keep clothes in the tied garbage bag until they 
can be adequately laundered.  
6. Wash hands, arms, and face with soap and water in a 
restroom sink or hand sink. Put on clean clothing, if 
necessary. Apply ethanol-based hand sanitizer to hands.  
7. Wash, rinse, and sanitize potentially contaminated food 
contact surfaces. Include food contact surfaces that were 
disinfected in step 5 of this SOP, and food contact surfaces 
that contained food discarded in step 6 of this SOP.  
8. Restock supplies for cleanup.  
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
 
MONITORING 
Standard daily cleaning of food services areas shall include:  
● Custodial Staff: Sweep and clean the cafeteria floors with a 
neutral cleaner. Cafeteria walls and ceilings shall be cleaned 
on an “as needed” basis. 
● Food Service Staff: Clean and disinfect cafeteria tables with 
a solution of bleach and water.  
NOTE: Cleaning of body fluid spills in food services areas will be 
done by the school’s custodial staff. This will include any bodily 
fluid spill on the cafeteria tables. In this case, only the affected 
table(s) will be cleaned by the custodial staff. All other cafeteria 
tables will be cleaned by the food service staff.  
1. The senior custodian is designated and trained to 
implement this SOP and trained in the use of necessary 
supplies. They will ensure that:  
● Necessary supplies are available at all times.  
● Custodians are:  
○ Educated on illnesses and symptoms that must be 
reported to their building service area manager or 
617-635-9162.  
○ Monitored for signs and symptoms of illness.  
2. The food service manager will ensure that food service 
employees are:  
● Educated on illnesses and symptoms that must be 
reported to managers.  
● Monitored for signs and symptoms of illness.  


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
 
Adapted from USDA document Cleaning and 
Disinfecting Body Fluid Spills (Miami County Public 
Health website). 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner:  
Senior Environmental Supervisor 
Department:  
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 
Campbell Resource Center, 1216 Dorchester 
Ave., Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-8300 
Fax:  
617-635-7855 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Name:  
Equipment Coordinator 
Department:  
Food and Nutritional Services 
Mailing Address: 
Food & Nutrition/Wellness Building, 370 
Columbia Road, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-9296 
Fax:  
617-635-9305 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-19 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 
 
Name:  
Sr. Manager, Building Services 
Department:  
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 
Campbell Resource Center, 1216 Dorchester 
Ave., Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-9165 
Fax:  
617-6359306 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SUP-20 
Version 01 
 
 
CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT 
 
THIS CIRCULAR WILL REMAIN IN EFFECT UNLESS RESCINDED OR 
SUPERSEDED BY A SUBSEQUENT VERSION 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
Massachusetts General Law (Chapter 119, Section 51A) requires 
that certain persons who in their professional capacity have 
reasonable cause to believe that a child under the age of 
eighteen (18) years is suffering serious physical or emotional 
injury resulting from abuse, including sexual abuse, or neglect, 
including malnutrition, inflicted upon them SHALL 
IMMEDIATELY, VIA TELEPHONE, REPORT THIS ABUSE OR 
NEGLECT TO THE DEPARTMENT OF CHILDREN AND FAMILIES, 
either via the attached Area Offices Telephone Directory or via 
the 24-hour reporting hotline: 1-800-792-5200.  
 
Within forty-eight (48) hours of the initial oral report, these 
professionals are required under Massachusetts law to notify the 
Department of Children and Families (DCF) in writing using the 
attached Report Form.  The Report Form should be sent by 
registered mail, with return receipt requested, to the appropriate 
DCF Area Office.  A new Report Form must be completed for 
each new injury or re-injury.  
  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 2 of 15 
 
WHO MUST REPORT? 
By law, the following professionals, among others, are “mandated 
reporters” and must report cases of child abuse or neglect to 
DCF:  physicians, medical interns, medical examiners, dentists, 
nurses, teachers, educational administrators, guidance 
counselors, family counselors, probation officers, school 
attendance officers, social workers, psychologists, and police 
officers.  When these professionals are employed at a school, they 
must either notify DCF directly or, alternatively, notify the person 
in charge of the school or that person’s designated agent. Out of 
an abundance of caution, however, all school professional staff in 
the Boston Public Schools are required to report to DCF any 
instance of neglect or abuse that they observe or which is 
brought to their attention. 
 
Please note that all employees are required to report any 
suspected or alleged bias-based conduct toward a student 
or sexual misconduct toward a student under circulars EQT-
02 and EQT-03. This report must be made to a school 
administrator and/or directly to the Office of Equity. A 
determination will then be made whether it meets the 
standard for a report to the Department of Children and 
Families under SUP-20.  Please see Attachment 1, Procedures 
for Reporting Suspected Child Abuse and Neglect Cases. 
 
Nothing in this policy prohibits a school professional from 
notifying DCF directly when such school professional has 
reasonable cause to believe abuse or neglect occurred.  In the 
event that a school professional notifies the building 
administrator in charge of an incident of suspected abuse or 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 3 of 15 
 
neglect, that building administrator must make a report to DCF 
following the procedures outlined in this circular. 
 
Any other person may report a case of child abuse or neglect 
when there is reasonable cause to believe that a child’s health or 
welfare is being harmed, or is at substantial risk of being harmed, 
as a result of abuse or neglect.  
WHAT TO REPORT? 
Any incident in which there is reasonable cause to believe that a 
child’s physical or mental health or welfare is harmed or is 
threatened with substantial risk of harm through abuse or 
neglect must be reported. Truancy by itself is not a reportable 
matter. This means that a child missing school is not, on its own, 
a reason to report. 
ABUSE. Abuse includes: 
• Physical, mental, or emotional injury by other than 
accidental means, i.e., beatings, cuttings, burns, broken 
bones, multiple bruises  
• Physical dependency on an addictive drug at birth  
• Any sexual act against another person either by force, or by 
threat of force or bodily injury, or against the person’s will.  
This includes a sexual act against another person who is 
incapable of giving consent either because of their 
temporary or permanent mental or physical incapacity or 
because s/he is a minor.  Such crimes as indecent assault 
and battery, rape, rape with force, rape and abuse, assault 
with intent to rape and unnatural and lascivious acts 
constitute a sexual assault.   


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 4 of 15 
 
Indecent assault and battery includes, but is not limited to, 
inappropriate and unwanted touching of private body parts.  
A person under the age of 14 is legally unable to consent to 
this type of sexual activity. 
NEGLECT. Neglect is deemed to exist when the person or persons 
responsible for a child’s care, although financially able to do so, 
fail to provide the child with: 
• Adequate food, clothing, shelter, education, or medical care 
• Proper supervision and/or guardianship. 
 
The attached Procedures for Reporting Suspected Child Abuse or 
Neglect detail the relevant reporting procedures to be followed 
by Boston Public School employees. 
 
IMMUNITY 
All reports will be held in strict confidence.  A person required to 
report who does in fact make a report, including a report of 
abuse or neglect by personnel in the public school system, shall 
not be held liable in any civil or criminal action by reason of that 
report.  In addition, a person who, although not required to do so 
by statute, voluntarily makes a report shall not be liable in any 
civil or criminal action by reason of that report if it was made in 
good faith and that person did not perpetuate, inflict, or cause 
the reported abuse or neglect. 
In accordance with Massachusetts law (Massachusetts General 
Laws Chapter 119, Section 51B), persons who are mandatory 
reporters of child abuse shall share any relevant information 
requested by the Department of Children and Families during 
the investigation of a specific 51A child abuse report.  Those 
persons who are required to share information are protected 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 5 of 15 
 
from civil or criminal liability for providing such information 
without parental consent. 
CONSEQUENCES FOR VIOLATIONS OF THE REPORTING 
REQUIREMENT 
Under Massachusetts law, any person required to make oral and 
written reports of suspected child abuse or neglect who fails to 
do so and any person who knowingly files a frivolous report will 
be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
Boston Public School employees required by law to report 
suspected child abuse or neglect who fail to do so in accordance 
with the attached procedures will be subject to discipline. 
PROHIBITION OF RETALIATION 
Retaliation against any Boston Public School student or 
employee for filing a complaint of abuse or neglect, including a 
report of abuse or neglect against personnel in the public school 
system, is strictly prohibited.   
In accordance with both Massachusetts law and the attached 
Procedures, any Boston Public School employees who 
themselves perpetuate, inflict, or cause the abuse of any child will 
be subject to discipline as outlined in the attached Procedures. 
ATTACHMENTS: 
• Procedures for Reporting Suspected Child Abuse and 
Neglect Cases 
• Area Offices and Telephone Directory Guide for Reporting 
Purposes 
• DCF 51A Reporting Form     
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 6 of 15 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Student Support 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston MA, 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9000 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 7 of 15 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
 (p. 1 of 6) 
 
PROCEDURES FOR REPORTING SUSPECTED 
CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT CASES 
 
1. Pursuant to Massachusetts General Law Chapter 119, Section 
51A, a mandated reporter is required to report when they has 
“reasonable cause to believe” that a child under the age of 
eighteen (18) years is suffering from abuse or neglect.  Out of 
an abundance of caution, however, all school professional 
staff in the Boston Public Schools are required to report to 
DCF any instance of neglect or abuse that they observe or 
which is brought to their attention. 
 
2. Upon such suspicion of abuse or neglect of a child under 18 
years of age, a teacher, or any other mandated reporter, will 
immediately report their concerns to the building 
administrator and will confer with the school nurse. Such 
abuse includes but is not limited to physical, mental, or 
emotional injury by other than accidental means (e.g. 
beatings, cuttings, burns, broken bones, multiple bruises). In 
the event of suspected physical abuse, a school nurse should 
be contacted to immediately examine and document the 
child’s physical condition.  Appropriate Special Education and 
Support Services staff should be notified of the situation 
concerning the suspected abuse or neglect.   
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 8 of 15 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
 (p. 2 of 6) 
 
3. Upon suspicion of sexual assault, please refer immediately 
to the Equity Circular on Sexual Misconduct Toward Students 
(EQT-03) and follow the reporting procedures outlined in that 
circular.  School personnel responding to sexual assault 
concerns will obtain only basic minimal facts of the alleged 
incident.  These basic facts should include:  (1) when the 
incident occurred; (2) where the incident occurred; (3) who 
assaulted the student, if known; (4) the nature of the 
incident; and (5) whether there are known witnesses and/or 
other victims.  In an attempt to minimize the emotional 
stress victims of abuse experience and to preserve the 
integrity and reliability of the required DCF and law 
enforcement investigations, additional interviews and more 
detailed probing questioning are not to be conducted by 
school officials. A student who reports being a victim of a 
sexual assault should never be asked to submit a written 
report detailing the incident nor be asked to discuss the 
incident with the alleged perpetrator present at any time 
and under any circumstances.  School personnel are 
mandated reporters but should not investigate the 
allegations or prepare a probing and/or detailed incident 
report. 
 
4. The building administrator or designee shall compile any and 
all relevant information from school professionals with 
knowledge of the incident and student.  They shall also 
compile any and all relevant information from school records 
to be used when reporting the case to the appropriate DCF 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 9 of 15 
 
Area Office and have all such information and records 
available for DCF.   
 
5. The building administrator must report to DCF even if they 
believe that the teacher, nurse, or other mandated reporter is 
mistaken in suspecting abuse or neglect. The building 
administrator may not substitute their judgment for that of 
any mandated reporter within the school.  The failure to file 
a report as mandated by law will subject the building 
administrator (or other mandated reporter who fails to 
meet their statutory obligations) to discipline in 
accordance with BPS employee discipline procedures. 
 
6. The building administrator or designee must immediately 
call the DCF Screening Area Office to report the case. If the 
report must be made after 5:00 PM, the building 
administrator or designee must immediately call the DCF 
Hotline number at 1-800-792-5200.   
 
7. The child must not be sent home from school before the 
verbal 51A report is filed with DCF.  A written report must be 
forwarded within 48 hours. 
 
8. Within 48 hours of the initial oral report, the building 
administrator or designee will send written notification to the 
DCF Area Office via fax or via the Virtual Gateway Portal at 
Mass.gov.  A confidential copy of the written notification form 
(copy attached) should be retained in the office of the 
principal or headmaster.   
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 10 of 15 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
 (p. 4 of 6) 
 
 
9. If the alleged abuser is an employee of the Boston School 
Department, a copy of the notification should also be 
forwarded to the BPS Office of the Labor Relations.  If an 
investigation confirms the allegations, the offending 
employee will be subject to discipline in accordance with 
BPS employee discipline procedures. 
 
10. The building administrator, in consultation with others as 
necessary, will decide how, when, and by whom the family, 
including the child who is suspected of being abused or 
neglected, will be notified of this report. Although the school 
is not required by law to notify the family, such notification is 
recommended.  In deciding whether to notify, the building 
administrator and others should consider whether 
notification will create a substantial risk to the student’s 
health, safety, or welfare.  DCF and the police and the 
Department of Social Work can provide consultation in 
making this determination to ensure the child’s safety and 
well-being.  
 
11. DCF investigators, who report to the school in order to 
conduct one phase of their investigation, should be required 
to identify themselves and to verify their assignment to the 
case.  School-based staff should encourage them to interview 
the child at home in the presence of the parent or caregiver, 
unless the 51A has been filed against the parent.  In this latter 
case, the interview of the child may be conducted in school 
in the presence of the building administrator or designee.  
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 11 of 15 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
 (p. 5 of 6) 
 
 
12. Within sixty (60) days of filing a report, the building 
administrator should receive a feedback report from DCF 
detailing the department’s findings and specifying the social 
services that the department intends to offer the child. This 
feedback report may be used to plan further collaboration 
with other professionals assisting the family. 
 
13. Certain cases that the schools report to DCF (sexual abuse 
and exploitation, serious physical abuse, and some others) 
will also be referred by DCF to the local police and the District 
Attorney’s Office for investigation.  In these circumstances, 
these agencies will typically conduct a multidisciplinary team 
investigation.  This investigation will typically include an 
interview with the alleged victim(s), alleged perpetrators(s), 
and witness(es).  Relevant investigative information will be 
provided to the school when appropriate, and as permitted 
by law.   
 
14. Throughout the reporting, investigation, and follow-up 
process, school documentation must be done in a way that 
ensures confidentiality.  Accordingly, reports of suspected 
abuse or neglect will not be part of a child’s educational 
record, but will instead be kept separately.  The school will 
maintain files of the 51A reports of suspected abuse or 
neglect for no more than five years. 
 
 
 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 12 of 15 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
 (p. 6 of 6) 
 
15. When a building administrator seeks to remove a child from 
school because of, for example, a disciplinary emergency 
removal or illness, a parent may not always be available to 
pick the child up. Other childcare, eldercare, school or work 
responsibilities, or lack of transportation may delay or 
prevent a parent from being able to immediately pick up the 
child from school. This is not, on its own, a reportable matter. 
Maintaining the child’s safety at school or ensuring that the 
child has a safe way to return home is the building 
administrator’s responsibility. 
 
16. Importantly, a special education dispute is not, on its own, a 
reportable matter. A parent disagreeing with school staff’s 
opinions that a child needs a particular special education 
placement, service, or evaluation is not a reportable matter. 
In such situations, school staff should contact the assigned 
special education district assistant program director.  
 
17. Each school building will designate a representative who will 
ensure that, in the event of the building administrator’s 
absence, the above reporting procedures are followed as 
required by law.  School Health will make arrangements for 
emergency nursing staff coverage so that the required 
investigation, discussed above, will begin before the end of 
the day.   
 
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 13 of 15 
 
EMERGENCY PROTOCOL 
 
In the event of a clear emergency where the life or safety of a child 
is in imminent danger, the building administrator, designee, or 
other mandated reporter should immediately notify the 
appropriate DCF Area Office and file the required 51A Report.  
After 5:00 PM, the school official should use the Massachusetts 
Child Abuse Emergency Hotline, at 1-800-792-5200.   A written 
report must be filed within forty-eight hours. 
 
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 119, Section 51B(3) authorizes 
the Department of Children and Families to take a child into 
immediate temporary custody, without parental permission or 
prior notice, if the department has reasonable cause to believe 
that this action is necessary to protect the child from further 
abuse or neglect.  Emergency responses by the Department of 
Children and Families may include law enforcement, 
depending upon the nature of the incident reported.  If DCF 
seeks to exercise this authority in the school setting, the building 
administrator shall: 
 
1. Verify the DCF representative’s identification and retain a copy 
of the identification in the student record 
 
2. Contact the DCF representative’s immediate supervisor to verify 
the need for the DCF action 
 
3.   
Maintain a log, which should be filed with the office copy of 
the 51A report, of the action, the DCF employee(s) involved, and 
the DCF Area Office involved; and provide any other pertinent 
information related to the suspected abuse or neglect. 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 14 of 15 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
DEPARTMENT OF CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 
Boston-Brookline Region Area Directory 
 
Boston Regional Office 
1785 Columbus Ave. Fifth Floor  
Roxbury, MA 02119-1041Local Number:  (617) 989-9200 
Fax Number:  (617) 989-9250 
 
Hyde Park Area Office 
1530 River Street 
Hyde Park, MA  02136 
Local Number:  (617) 363-5000 
Fax Number:  (617) 363-5175 
 
Dimock Street Area Office 
30 Dimock Street 
Roxbury, MA  02119 
Local Number:  (617) 989-2800 
Fax Number:  (617) 445-9147 
 
Park Street Area Office 
50 Park Street 
Dorchester, MA  02122 
Local Number:  (617) 822-4700 
Fax Number:  (617) 282-1019 
 
 
 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-20 
Page 15 of 15 
 
Harbor Area Office 
80 Everett Avenue, Suite 100Chelsea, MA  01250 
Local Number:  (617) 660-3400 
Fax Number:  (617) 884-0215 
 
 
BOSTON POLICE DEPARTMENT – FAMILY JUSTICE CENTER 
(Formerly the Sexual Assault Unit) 
 
Main Number: (617) 343-4400 
 
SUFFOLK COUNTY DISTRICT ATTORNEY’S OFFICE 
 
Main Number: (617) 619-4000 
Child Abuse Unit: (617) 619-4300  
 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 3 
 
DCF 51A Reporting Form    


Page 1:
Superintendent’s
Circular
NUMBER:
SUP-19
Version 01
DE-ESCALATION, PHYSICAL RESTRAINT,
SECLUSION AND TIME-OUT POLICY
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded
by a subsequent version.
I. INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this circular is to ensure that every student
participating in a Boston Public Schools program is free from the
use of physical restraint inconsistent with state law and district
policy and to ensure that physical restraint is used only in
emergency situations of last resort, after other lawful and less
intrusive alternatives have failed or been deemed inappropriate,
and with extreme caution. The purpose of the circular is also to
state that the use of seclusion is prohibited by law and in the
Boston Public Schools. This circular is consistent with regulations
established by the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and
Secondary Education, 603 CMR 46.00 and with school district
policy.
The Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary
Education established regulations governing the use of physical
restraints on students. These regulations supersede all previously
established procedures. The Boston Public Schools must follow
the provisions of 603 CMR 46.00, which regulates physical
restraint on students in Massachusetts public school districts,
charter schools, and collaborative and special education schools.


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 2 of 35
Physical restraint should be administered only when needed to
protect a student or other students and staff from assault or
imminent danger of serious physical harm. Physical restraint
should be administered in the least intrusive manner possible
and should be used to prevent or minimize harm to the student.
Boston Public Schools does not use Seclusion. Seclusion shall
mean the involuntary confinement of a student alone in a room
or area from which the student is physically prevented from
leaving. Seclusion does not include a time-out, which shall mean
a behavioral support strategy developed pursuant to 603 CMR
46.04(1) in which a student temporarily separates from the
learning activity or the classroom, either by choice or by direction
from staff, for the purpose of calming. During time-out, a student
must be continuously observed by a staff member. Staff shall be
with the student or immediately available to the student at all
times. The space used for time-out must be clean, safe, sanitary,
and appropriate for the purpose of calming. Time-out shall cease
as soon as the student has calmed and no time-out can exceed
30 minutes without the express approval of the School Leader or
their designee.
II. DEFINITIONS
Mechanical restraint shall mean the use of any physical device or
equipment to restrict a student's freedom of movement.
Mechanical restraint does not include devices implemented by
trained school personnel, or utilized by a student that have been
prescribed by an appropriate medical or related services
professional, and are used for the specific and approved


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 3 of 35
positioning or protective purposes for which such devices were
designed. Examples of such devices include: adaptive devices or
mechanical supports used to achieve proper body position,
balance, or alignment to allow greater freedom of mobility than
would be possible without the use of such devices or mechanical
supports; vehicle safety restraints when used as intended during
the transport of a student in a moving vehicle; restraints for
medical immobilization; or orthopedically prescribed devices that
permit a student to participate in activities without risk of harm.
*BPS prohibits this type of restraint*
Medication restraint shall mean the administration of
medication for the purpose of temporarily controlling behavior.
Medication prescribed by a licensed physician and authorized by
the parent/guardian for administration in the school setting is not
medication restraint. *BPS prohibits this type of restraint*
Physical escort shall mean a temporary touching or holding,
without the use of force, of the hand, wrist, arm, shoulder, or
back for the purpose of inducing a student who is agitated to
walk to a safe location.
Physical restraint shall mean direct physical contact that
prevents or significantly restricts a student's freedom of
movement. Physical restraint does not include: brief physical
contact to promote student safety, providing physical guidance
or prompting when teaching a skill, redirecting attention,
providing comfort, or a physical escort.
Prone restraint shall mean a physical restraint in which a student
is placed face down on the floor or another surface, and physical


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 4 of 35
pressure is applied to the student's body to keep the student in
the face-down position. *BPS prohibits this type of restraint*
Seclusion shall mean the involuntary confinement of a student
alone in a room or area from which the student is physically
prevented from leaving. Seclusion does not include a time-out as
defined in 603 CMR 46.02. *Seclusion is prohibited in public
schools and in BPS*
Time-out shall mean a behavioral support strategy developed
pursuant to 603 CMR 46.04(1) in which a student temporarily
separates from the learning activity or the classroom, either by
choice or by direction from staff, for the purpose of calming.
During time-out, a student must be continuously observed by a
staff member. Staff shall be with the student or immediately
available to the student at all times. The space used for time-out
must be clean, safe, sanitary, and appropriate for the purpose of
calming. Time-out shall cease as soon as the student has calmed
and no time-out can exceed 20 minutes without the express
approval of the School Leader or their designee.
III. PHYSICAL RESTRAINT PROCEDURES
A. METHODS FOR PREVENTING VIOLENCE AND ENGAGING
PARENTS/GUARDIANS
The BPS Behavioral Health Services department has school
psychologists assigned to all BPS schools and has social
workers that provide district-wide services. The Behavioral


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 5 of 35
Health Services department provides a wide continuum of
behavioral health services including prevention, at-risk and
intensive services. In addition, the Behavioral Health Services
team is the mental health crisis response team for the
district and works with educational staff to identify and
respond to unsafe situations.
In addition, BPS has developed a multi-tiered system of
supports for preventing student violence, self-injurious
behavior, and suicide, including individual crisis planning
and de-escalation of potentially dangerous behavior
occurring among groups of students or with an individual
student. The Comprehensive Behavioral Health Model
(CBHM) is a multi-tiered system of supports (MTSS) designed
to promote students' social, emotional, and behavioral
wellbeing. MTSS is a three-tier model of service delivery for
educational and behavioral services in a school setting. This
model is also often called Response to Intervention (RtI). In
BPS, the Academic Achievement Framework (AAF) is a
version of RtI focused on students' social and behavioral
learning. CBHM is focused on students' social and behavioral
learning. The goal of the CBHM Lighthouse model is to
create safe and supportive learning environments in which
students may grow and thrive academically, personally, and
socially. This includes providing the right amount of services
and supports at the right time when a student absolutely
needs them.
These models are based on the logic that the majority of
students can and will be successful when provided with
evidence-informed instruction and preventative


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 6 of 35
interventions. Appropriate interventions and the use of data
to assess progress help ensure that students who benefit
from progressively more intensive services will not need
them over the long-term.
BPS engages with parents and caregivers at a school level,
through the Guide for Families and Students and through
the Special Education Parent Advisory Council (or SEPAC) to
engage parents and caregivers in discussions about restraint
prevention and the use of restraint solely as an emergency
procedure.
B. USE OF RESTRAINT
Physical restraint should be administered only when needed
to protect a student or other students and staff from assault
or imminent serious physical harm. Physical restraint can
only be used as a last resort in an emergency when a
student’s behavior poses a threat of imminent, serious
physical harm to himself or herself or others, and the
student does not respond to verbal directives or other lawful
and less intrusive behavior interventions, or such
interventions are deemed inappropriate under the
circumstances. Physical restraint shall be limited to the use
of such reasonable force as is necessary, for the least
amount of time necessary, to protect a student or another
member of the school community from assault or imminent,
serious, physical harm. A physical restraint may only be


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 7 of 35
administered by school personnel who have been properly
trained in the use of physical restraint.
C. USE OF TIME-OUT
Seclusion does not include a time-out. A time-out is not a
restraint. A time-out is a behavioral support strategy in
which a student temporarily separates from the learning
activity or the classroom, either by choice or by direction
from staff, for the purpose of calming. Time-outs are
permitted as a behavioral strategy if the student is with a
staff member or is continuously observed by a staff member
who is immediately available to the student at all times. The
space used for time-out must be clean, safe, sanitary, and
appropriate for the purpose of calming. Time-out shall cease
as soon as the student has calmed. Time-out may not be
used for discipline or punishment. The preference is for
time-out to be implemented within a classroom to the
greatest extent possible. Staff must document in Aspen the
antecedent behavior prior to the time-out, any other
behavioral support strategies attempted, and the time, date,
duration and location of any time-out used as a behavioral
support strategy. The school leader must give and
document approval for any time-out to continue more than
30 minutes based on the individual student's continuing
agitation.


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 8 of 35
D. OTHER LIMITATIONS ON USE OF RESTRAINT
Physical restraint shall be limited to using such reasonable
force as is necessary to protect a student or another
member of the school community from assault or imminent,
serious, physical harm. 603 CMR 46.03(3).
Instances when restraint is not to be used:
1. Physical restraint is not to be used as a means of
discipline or punishment. 603 CMR
46.03(2)(a).
2. Physical restraint is not to be used when the student
cannot be safely restrained because it is medically
contraindicated for reasons including but not limited to
asthma, seizures, cardiac condition, obesity, bronchitis,
communication-related disabilities, or risk of vomiting.
603 CMR 46.03(2)(b).
3. Physical restraint is not to be used as a response to the
destruction of property, school disruption, refusal of the
student to comply with public education program rules
or staff directive, or verbal threats when those actions
do not constitute a threat of assault, or imminent,
serious, physical harm. 603 CMR 46.03(2)(c).
4. Physical restraint should not be used as a standard
response for any individual student. No written
individual behavior plan or individualized education
program (IEP) may include the use of physical restraint


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 9 of 35
as a standard response to any behavior. 603 CMR
46.03(2)(d).
5. Boston Public Schools prohibits the following forms of
restraint: mechanical, medication, seclusion, prone, and
prone restraints.
Nothing in this document, or in 603 CMR 46.00, prohibits:
1. the right of an individual to report to appropriate
authorities a crime committed by a student or another
individual.
2. law enforcement, judicial authorities, or school security
personnel from exercising their responsibilities,
including the physical detainment of a student or other
persons alleged to have committed a crime or posing a
security risk.
3. the exercise of an individual’s responsibilities as a
mandated reporter of child abuse/neglect according to
MGL c. 119, s 51A to the appropriate state agency.
4. the protection afforded publicly funded students under
other state or federal laws, including those laws that
provide for the rights of students who have been found
eligible to receive special education or related services.


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 10 of 35
E. PROPER ADMINISTRATION OF PHYSICAL RESTRAINT
●Restraint must be implemented only by trained and
actively certified personnel. Whenever possible, the
restraint shall be witnessed by at least one person who
did not engage in the restraint. As an exception, in the
event of an emergency situation where no trained staff
are available to protect students and staff from imminent
harm, the restraint may be implemented until properly
trained staff have arrived.
●Restraints must be implemented in a way that does not
prevent a student from breathing or speaking.
●The use of unnecessary force in administering physical
restraint is expressly prohibited. Intervening staff can use
only the amount of force necessary to protect the
students or others from physical injury. Staff shall select
the safest and least intrusive method that is likely to be
effective for the student.
●If a student indicates or is observed to be in significant
physical distress (difficulty breathing, signs or indicators
of pain or discomfort, change in color or alertness, etc.),
the student shall be released immediately, and medical
assistance should be sought.
●Students shall be released from physical restraint as soon
as it is safe to do so, meaning that the student is no
longer a danger to themselves or others and/or a plan has
been made to manage the student safely without having
to use physical management.


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 11 of 35
●In the rare event that a student is in crisis for more than
20 minutes, restraints over 20 minutes must have
approval from the school leader. The school leader must
document that approval was granted for any restraint
over 20 minutes.
●Follow up procedures following restraint must be
implemented. These include a debrief with the student (if
appropriate), a review of the incident with staff, and any
needed follow up with student witnesses.
●The school nurse should assess the student’s physical
condition after any restraint.
F. SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
Pursuant to 603 CMR 46.05(5), the following is required:
1. A restraint shall not be administered in a manner that
prevents the student from speaking or breathing.
2. A restraint shall be administered in such a way to
prevent or minimize physical harm.
3. During a restraint, a staff member shall continuously
monitor the physical status of the student including
skin temperature and color, and respiration.
4. If at any time during the restraint the student
expresses or demonstrates significant physical distress
including, but not limited to, difficulty breathing, the
restraint will immediately terminate, and medical
assistance will be sought.


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 12 of 35
5. Program staff will review and consider any known
medical or psychological limitations, known or
suspected trauma history, and/or behavioral
intervention plans regarding the use of physical
restraint on an individual student.
6. During a restraint, staff will continuously talk to and
engage the student in an attempt to de-escalate
behavior and to end the restraint as soon as possible.
7. Staff administering physical restraint will use the safest
method available that is appropriate to the situation.
8. If a student is restrained for a period longer than 20
minutes, program staff shall obtain approval from the
school leader. The approval shall be based upon the
student’s continued agitation during the restraint
justifying the need for continued restraint.
9. After the release of a student from restraint, the
incident, when applicable, will be reviewed with the
student and the behavior that led up to the restraint
will be addressed.
10.
The staff person(s) who administered the restraint
will also have a review to discuss whether proper
restraint procedures were followed and consider
whether any follow-up is appropriate for students who
witnessed the incident.


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 13 of 35
IV. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
A. FOLLOWING EACH RESTRAINT
Following the use of any physical intervention of any
duration that meets the definition of physical restraint under
DESE regulations, several steps must be taken to notify
appropriate parties and report the restraint in both BPS and
DESE systems:
●Notify School Administration: Notify school
administration verbally as soon as possible, and provide
written report by the next school working day. In the
event that the school leader was involved in the
restraint, the restraint must be reported to the School
Superintendent or Operational Leader within the same
timeline.
●Notify Parents/Guardians: The school leader or
director of the program notifies the parent/guardian
verbally as soon as possible (by the end of the day of
incident), and by written report in the language of the
home to an email provided by the parent/guardian or
by regular mail postmarked within 3 working days of
the incident. The written report shall include:
○Student information, the names of those involved
in the restraint, and observer names (if any). The
report will also include the name of the
administrator notified if the event went beyond 20
minutes.


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 14 of 35
○Date and time of the restraint, including
beginning and ending timesA brief summary of
the event in progress at the time of restraint, the
immediate antecedent to the challenging
behavior, efforts/attempts at de-escalation, any
alternatives to restraint tried, and documentation
of any injuries to staff or students. The summary
should also include description of the holds used
and why they were necessary, any reaction of the
student to the restraint, how the restraint ended.
○Any further actions taken by the school,
opportunities for the parent/guardian to discuss
the restraint, any consequences that may be
imposed on the student, or any other related
matter.
Important note: The school leader will print a copy of
the same report submitted to DESE (see “Report to
DESE” below) as written documentation of the
restraint and email or mail it to the parent/guardian.
The report to DESE should contain the required
information listed above.
●Record in Aspen: a conduct incident must be recorded
in Aspen within 24 hours, detailing attempts to
de-escalate, provide limits, type of restraint used and
duration. The use of restraint should be added as a
conduct action of “Restraint-Physical.”
●Report to DESE: all restraints must also be reported to
DESE via the DESE Security Portal


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 15 of 35
(https://gateway.edu.state.ma.us/edu/myportal/meoe)
within three business days. The school leader is
responsible for ensuring that all reporting timelines are
adhered to and that the restraint is uploaded to the
portal in a timely manner.
○In the event of an injury during restraint, a copy of
the written report must be sent to DESE within
three school working days. In addition, the school
must also send the copy of the record of restraints
maintained by the school leader for the 30-day
period before the date of the reported incident.
The program will be notified of any additional
steps needed within 30 calendar days of receipt of
the reports.
B. DATA REVIEW
1. Individual Student Review
The school leader shall conduct a weekly review of the
data to identify any students who have been restrained
multiple times that week. If students are identified as
having been involved in multiple restraints in a week, the
school leader will convene a support team to:
(a) review and discussion of the written reports
submitted in accordance with 603 CMR 46.06 and any
comments provided by the student and
parent/guardian about such reports and the use of the
restraints;


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 16 of 35
(b) an analysis of the circumstances leading up to each
restraint, including factors such as time of day, day of
the week, antecedent events, and individuals involved;
(c) consideration of factors that may have contributed
to escalation of behaviors, consideration of alternatives
to restraint, including de-escalation techniques and
possible interventions, and such other strategies and
decisions as appropriate, with the goal of reducing or
eliminating the use of restraint in the future;
​
(d) agreement on a written plan of action by the
program.
*If the school leader directly participated in the restraint, a
duly qualified individual designated by the superintendent
or board of trustees shall lead the review team's
discussion. The school leader shall ensure that a record of
each individual student review is maintained and made
available for review by the Department or the
parent/guardian, upon request.
2. Monthly School-Wide Review
The school leader will complete a monthly review of all
school-wide restraint data. The review should look for
patterns like time of day or day of week, individuals
involved, types of restraints or durations for specific
students, duration of restraints, and the number and
types of injuries. Based on this review, the school leader
may decide that updates or retraining are needed or any
other actions needed with the goal of reducing or


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 17 of 35
eliminating restraints
V. TRAINING REQUIREMENTS
A. FOR ALL STAFF
The laws of MA require that all school district staff that
interact with students receive an annual Prevention of
Restraint and Seclusion and De-Escalation Training. To
respond to this requirement BPS has created an
asynchronous online learning module consistent with 603
CMR 46.04(2). The training must be completed within the
month of September of every school year. For employees
hired after the beginning of the school year, the training
must be completed within the first month of their hire.
Each school leader shall determine a time and method to
provide all program staff with training regarding the
program's restraint prevention and behavior support policy
and requirements when restraint is used.
Training shall include information on the following:
(a) The role of the student, family, and staff in
preventing restraint;
(b) The program's restraint prevention and behavior
support policy and procedures, including use of
time-out as a behavior support strategy distinct from
seclusion;
(c) Interventions that may preclude the need for


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 18 of 35
restraint, including de-escalation of problematic
behaviors and other alternatives to restraint in
emergency circumstances;
(d) When behavior presents an emergency that
requires physical restraint, the types of permitted
physical restraints and related safety considerations,
including information regarding the increased risk of
injury to a student when any restraint is used, in
particular a restrain of extended duration;
(e) Administering physical restraint in accordance with
medical or psychological limitations, known or
suspected trauma history, and/or behavioral
intervention plans applicable to an individual student;
and
(f) Identification of program staff who have received
in-depth training pursuant to 603 CMR 46.04(3) in the
use of physical restraint
Below is the link to the training.
De-escalation training link
B. FOR ALL STAFF AUTHORIZED TO SERVE AS A
SCHOOL-WIDE RESOURCE ON THE PROPER
ADMINISTRATION OF PHYSICAL RESTRAINT
At the beginning of each school year, school leaders are
required to identify program staff who are authorized to
serve as a school-wide resource to assist in ensuring proper
administration of physical restraint. These individuals will


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 19 of 35
participate in in-depth training in the use of physical
restraint. Such training will include the content described in
603 CMR 46.04(4) and be competency-based and be at least
sixteen (16) hours in length with at least one refresher
training occurring annually thereafter. This training will be in
the Safety Care Program and provided by the Office of Social
Work Department or Special Education. Staff can register for
Safety Care training on Vector.
Only public education program personnel who have
received Safety Care training shall administer physical
restraint on students. Whenever possible, the administration
of restraint shall be witnessed by at least one adult who
does not participate in the restraint. However, the training
requirements shall not preclude a teacher, employee, or
agent of the public education program from using
reasonable force to protect students, other persons, or
themselves from assault or imminent, serious physical
harm. 603 CMR 46.05(1)
C. PROPER ADMINISTRATION OF RESTRAINT
Please review the Proper Administration of Restraint in Section III
above. This section gives additional details directly from the state
regulations.
1. Trained Personnel. Only public education program
personnel who have received training pursuant to 603
CMR 46.03(2) or (3) shall administer physical restraint
on students. Whenever possible, the administration of


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 20 of 35
a restraint shall be witnessed by at least one adult who
does not participate in the restraint. The training
requirements shall not preclude a teacher, employee or
agent of a public education program from using
reasonable force to protect students, other persons or
themselves from assault or imminent, serious, physical
harm.
2. Use of Force. A person administering a physical
restraint shall use only the amount of force necessary
to protect the student or others from serious physical
injury or harm.
3. Safest Method. A person administering physical
restraint shall use the safest method available and
appropriate to the situation subject to the safety
requirements set forth in 603 CMR 46.05(5). Floor
restraints, including prone restraints otherwise
permitted under 603 CMR 46.03(1)(b), shall be
prohibited in Boston Public Schools.
4. Duration of Restraint. All physical restraint must be
terminated as soon as the student is no longer an
immediate danger to himself or others, or the student
indicates that he or she cannot breathe, or if the
student is observed to be in severe distress, such as
having difficulty breathing, or sustained or prolonged
crying or coughing.


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 21 of 35
5. Safety Requirements. Additional requirements for the
use of physical restraint:
(a) No restraint shall be administered in such a way
that the student is prevented from breathing or
speaking. During the administration of a restraint,
a staff member shall continuously monitor the
physical status of the student, including skin
temperature and color, and respiration.
(b) Restraint shall be administered in such a way so
as to prevent or minimize physical harm. If, at any
time during a physical restraint, the student
expresses or demonstrates significant physical
distress including, but not limited to, difficulty
breathing, the student shall be released from the
restraint immediately, and school staff shall take
steps to seek medical assistance.
(c) If a student is restrained for a period longer than
20 minutes, program staff shall obtain the
approval of the principal. The approval shall be
based upon the student's continued agitation
during the restraint justifying the need for
continued restraint.
(d) Program staff shall review and consider any
known medical or psychological limitations,
known or suspected trauma history, and/or
behavioral intervention plans regarding the use of
physical restraint on an individual student.


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 22 of 35
(e) After the release of a student from a restraint, the
public education program shall implement
follow-up procedures. These procedures shall
include reviewing the incident with the student to
address the behavior that precipitated the
restraint, reviewing the incident with the staff
person(s) who administered the restraint to
discuss whether proper restraint procedures were
followed, and consideration of whether any
follow-up is appropriate for students who
witnessed the incident.
D. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
Please review the Reporting Requirements in Section IV
above. This section gives additional details directly from the
state regulations.
1.
Circumstances under which a physical restraint must
be reported. Program staff shall report the use of any
physical restraint as specified in 603 CMR 46.06(2).
2. Informing the Principal. The program staff member
who administered the restraint shall verbally inform the
School Leader of the restraint as soon as possible, and
by written report no later than the next school working
day. The written report shall be provided to the School
Leaderfor review of the use of the restraint. If the
School Leaderhas administered the restraint, the
School Leadershall prepare the report and submit it to


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 23 of 35
an individual or team designated by the
superintendent or board of trustees for review. The
School Leadershall maintain an on-going record of all
reported instances of physical restraint, which shall be
made available for review by the Department or the
student's parent/guardian, upon request.
3. Informing Parents/Guardians. The School Leadershall
make reasonable efforts to verbally inform the
student's parent/guardian of the restraint within 24
hours of the event, and shall notify the parent/guardian
by written report sent either within three school
working days of the restraint to an email address
provided by the parent/guardian for communications
about the student, or by regular mail postmarked no
later than three school working days of the restraint. If
the program customarily provides a parent/guardian of
a student with report cards and other necessary
school-related information in a language other than
English, the written restraint report shall be provided to
the parent/guardian in that language. The School
Leader shall provide the student and the
parent/guardian an opportunity to comment orally and
in writing on the use of the restraint and on
information in the written report.
4. Contents of Report. The written report required by 603
CMR 46.06(2) and (3) shall include: (a) The name of the
student; the names and job titles of the staff who
administered the restraint, and observers, if any; the
date of the restraint; the time the restraint began and


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 24 of 35
ended; the name of the School Leader or designee who
was verbally informed following the restraint; and, as
applicable, the name of the School Leader or designee
who approved continuation of a restraint beyond 20
minutes pursuant to 603 CMR 46.05(5)(c). (b) A
description of the activity in which the restrained
student and other students and staff in the same room
or vicinity were engaged immediately preceding the
use of physical restraint; the behavior that prompted
the restraint; the efforts made to prevent escalation of
behavior, including the specific de-escalation strategies
used; alternatives to restraint that were attempted; and
the justification for initiating physical restraint. (c) A
description of the administration of the restraint
including the holds used and reasons such holds were
necessary; the student's behavior and reactions during
the restraint; how the restraint ended; and
documentation of injury to the student and/or staff, if
any, during the restraint and any medical care
provided. (d) Information regarding any further
action(s) that the school has taken or may take,
including any consequences that may be imposed on
the student. (e) Information regarding opportunities for
the student's parent/guardian to discuss with school
officials the administration of the restraint, any
consequences that may be imposed on the student,
and any other related matter.
5. Individual Student Review. The School Leader shall
conduct a weekly review of restraint data to identify


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 25 of 35
students who have been restrained multiple times
during the week. If such students are identified, the
School Leadershall convene one or more review teams
as the School Leader deems appropriate to assess each
student's progress and needs. The assessment shall
include at least the following: (a) review and discussion
of the written reports submitted in accordance with
603 CMR 46.06 and any comments provided by the
student and parent/guardian about such reports and
the use of the restraints; (b) an analysis of the
circumstances leading up to each restraint, including
factors such as time of day, day of the week,
antecedent events, and individuals involved; (c)
consideration of factors that may have contributed to
escalation of behaviors, consideration of alternatives to
restraint, including de-escalation techniques and
possible interventions, and such other strategies and
decisions as appropriate, with the goal of reducing or
eliminating the use of restraint in the future; (d) an
agreement on a written plan of action by the
program.If the School Leader directly participated in
the restraint, a duly qualified individual designated by
the superintendent or board of trustees shall lead the
review team's discussion. The School Leader shall
ensure that a record of each individual student review
is maintained and made available for review by the
Department or the parent/guardian, upon request.
6. Administrative Review. The School Leader shall
conduct a monthly review of school-wide restraint data.


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 26 of 35
This review shall consider patterns of use of restraints
by similarities in the time of day, day of the week, or
individuals involved; the number and duration of
physical restraints school-wide and for individual
students; the duration of restraints; and the number
and type of injuries, if any, resulting from the use of
restraint. The School Leader shall determine whether it
is necessary or appropriate to modify the school's
restraint prevention and management policy, conduct
additional staff training on restraint reduction or
prevention strategies, such as training on positive
behavioral interventions and supports, or take such
other action as necessary or appropriate to reduce or
eliminate restraints.
7. Report All Restraint-related Injuries to the Department.
When a physical restraint has resulted in an injury to a
student or program staff member, the program shall
send a copy of the written report required by 603 CMR
46.06(4) to the Department postmarked no later than
three school working days of the administration of the
restraint. The program shall also send the Department
a copy of the record of physical restraints maintained
by the School Leader pursuant to 603 CMR 46.06(2) for
the 30-day period prior to the date of the reported
restraint.
8. Report All Physical Restraints to the Department. Every
program shall collect and annually report data to the
Department regarding the use of physical restraints.


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 27 of 35
Such data shall be reported in a manner and form
directed by the Department.
VI. COMPLAINT PROCEDURE
A. INFORMAL COMPLAINTS
Parents/guardians or students will notify the school leader or
designee of any concerns regarding restraint practices and
procedures. If a designee receives the complaint or a
concern, that designee shall notify the school leader within
the school day. The school leader shall attempt, within their
authority, to work with the parent/guardian to resolve the
complaint fairly and expeditiously. If the parent/guardian is
not satisfied with the resolution or does not choose an
informal resolution, then the parent/guardian may proceed
with the formal complaint process.
B. FORMAL COMPLAINTS
A complaint may be submitted to the Regional School
Superintendent regarding any restraint.
A complaint may be submitted to the Problem Resolution
System at the Massachusetts Department of Elementary
and Secondary Education at
https://www.doe.mass.edu/prs/intake/default.html.
For more information or questions on:


Page 28:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 28 of 35
Topic
Department &
Contact
Email
General Restraint
Policy, DESE
Requirements and
Documentation
Office of Specialized
Services
Kay Seale, Chief of
Specialized Services
Christine Trevisone,
Senior Advisor of
Specialized Services
kseale@bostonpublicscho
ols.org
ctrevisone@bostonpublics
chools.org
Safety-Care
(De-Escalation and
Physical Restraint
Training) – ABA
Strand
Office of Specialized
Services
Zachary Houston,
Assistant Director ABA
zhouston@bostonpublicsc
hools.org
Safety-Care
(De-Escalation and
Physical Restraint
Training) – non-ABA
schools
Office of Student
Support
Jenna Parafinczuk,
Director of Social Work
jparafinczuk@bostonpubli
cschools.org


Page 29:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 29 of 35
De-Escalation
Training
Office of Behavioral
Health
Andria Amador, Senior
Director of Behavioral
Health Services
aamador@bostonpublicsc
hools.org
Reporting
Schools Department
Drew Echelson, Chief
of Schools and
Accountability, or
Operational Leader for
Region
dechelson@bostonpublics
chools.org
●
Region 1: Jeichael
Henderson:
jhenderson@bostonp
ublicschools.org
●
Region 2: Courtney
Kinney:
cmaginnis@bostonp
ublicschools.org
●
Region 3: Michelle
Jordan:
mjordan2@bostonpu
blicschools.org
●
Region 4: Naima
Abdal-Khallaq:


Page 30:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 30 of 35
nabdalkhallaq@bosto
npublicschools.org
●
Region 5: Kristen
Weeks:
kweeks@bostonpubli
cschools.org
●
Region 6: Monique
Carter:
mcarter3@bostonpu
blicschools.org
●
Region 7: Nelson
Miranda:
nmiranda@bostonpu
blicschools.org
●
Region 8: Zach Solis:
zsolis@bostonpublics
chools.org
●
Region 9: Rui Gomes:
rgomes2@bostonpub
licschools.org
Mary Skipper, Superintendent


Page 31:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 31 of 35
ATTACHMENT A: QUICK REFERENCE DO’S AND DON’TS
FOR CRISIS INTERVENTION IN BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS
In Massachusetts, the use of physical restraint in public schools is
highly regulated, and it should only be employed as a last resort
to ensure the safety of students and staff. It is essential for teachers
and school staff to follow specific guidelines and best practices
when using physical restraint. Here's a list of Do's and Don'ts for
staff using physical restraint in public schools in Boston:
Do's:
●Use the Least Restrictive Method: Use the least restrictive
means of intervention. Alternatives to restraint, including but
not limited to verbal or other de-escalation techniques,
should be attempted before resorting to physical restraint.
●Safety First: Physical restraint should only be used when
there is a threat of assault or imminent serious physical harm.
It should never be used as a form of punishment or discipline.
●Training: Teachers and staff should receive proper training in
safe and effective restraint techniques, including annual
refresher training.
●Documentation: Document the incident thoroughly,
including the reason for restraint, the duration, and any
injuries sustained. This documentation should be completed
as soon as possible after the incident. The documentation
should contain the facts of the incident and restraint rather
than conclusions.


Page 32:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 32 of 35
●Documentation of Time-Outs: Staff should document in
Aspen the antecedent behavior and the time, date, duration
and location of any time-out used as a behavioral support
strategy. The school leader must give approval for any
time-out to continue more than 30 minutes based on the
individual student's continuing agitation.
●Communication: Maintain open and effective
communication with other staff members during a restraint
to ensure a coordinated and safe response.In the rare event
that a student is in crisis for more than 20 minutes,
restraints over 20 minutes must have approval from the
school leader. The school leader must document that
approval was granted for any restraint over 20 minutes.
●Notify Parents/Guardians: The principal or director of the
program notifies the parent/guardian, verbally as soon as
possible (within 24 hours), and by written report within 3
school working days by providing a copy of the physical
restraint report submitted to DESE.
●Monitoring: Continuously monitor the student's physical and
emotional well-being during the restraint. All physical
restraint must be terminated as soon as the student is no
longer an immediate danger to themself or others, or the
student indicates that they cannot breathe, or if the student
is observed to be in severe distress, such as having difficulty
breathing, or sustained or prolonged crying or coughing.


Page 33:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 33 of 35
●Legal Compliance: Be aware of and follow all relevant laws,
regulations, and school policies regarding the use of physical
restraint in schools.
●Seek Medical Attention: If there are any injuries or signs of
distress during the restraint, seek immediate medical
attention for the student or impacted individual.
●School Nurse Assessment: Whenever possible, the school
nurse should assess the student’s physical condition
following a restraint.
Do nots:
●DON’T Implement Unnecessary Restraint: Do not use
physical restraint unless there is a threat of assault or an
imminent serious physical harm. It should not be used for
minor infractions or as a convenience for staff.
●DON’T Seclude: Always maintain visibility and ensure
continued communication with the student. Also ensure the
presence of another staff member if possible. Under no
circumstances may a student be left alone in a room or area
from which the student is physically prevented from leaving.
Doors cannot be locked during any time-out.
●DON’T Use Protracted Restraint: Do not continue the
restraint once the student is no longer an immediate danger
to themself or others, or if the student indicates they cannot
breathe or is observed to be in severe distress.


Page 34:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 34 of 35
●DON’T Restrain the Head or Neck: Do not use any form of
restraint that puts pressure on a student's head, neck, or
throat, as it can be dangerous and potentially lethal.
●DON’T Use Untrained Staff: Do not allow untrained or
unauthorized staff to engage in physical restraint. Only
trained personnel should be involved in the process.
●DON’T Use Mechanical Restraints: Do not use mechanical
restraints, such as handcuffs, on students in public schools.
●DON’T Use Restraints for Revenge or Punishment: Do not
use physical restraint as a means of revenge, discipline, or
punishment. Restraint should always be a last resort to
protect the safety of all involved.
●DON’T Fail to Report: Do not neglect to report the use of
physical restraint to school administration, parents/guardians,
and relevant authorities as required by law and school policy.
Reports should be carefully written to record the facts of the
incident and restraint.
Remember that the use of physical restraint in public schools is
a sensitive and potentially risky action that should only be used
when all other means of ensuring safety have been exhausted.
Compliance with Massachusetts laws and regulations is
essential to protect the well-being and rights of all students
involved.


Page 35:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 35 of 35
ATTACHMENT B: NOTIFICATION PROCESS


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
EL-04 
Version 01 
 
 
TITLE I EXPENDITURES FOR ENGLISH LEARNERS 
AMENDED ORDER BETWEEN LATINO PARENTS ET AL 
AND BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. General Information 
2. English Learner Equity Requirement  
3. General Guidelines 
4. Sample Acceptable Uses 
5. Annual Reporting of Title I Services 
 
1. GENERAL INFORMATION 
In 1992, the Boston Public Schools (BPS) and parents of English 
Learner students (ELs), who were represented by attorneys with 
Multicultural Education, Training and Advocacy, Inc. (META), 
entered into a binding consent decree that is enforceable by use 
of the federal court’s power to hold violators in contempt of court 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 2 of 19 
 
 
to compel compliance. A copy of this consent decree can be 
found on the Office of English Learners website. 
This Superintendent’s Circular outlines the basic components of 
the consent decree regarding appropriate Title I expenditures for 
ELs and provides guidelines to comply with the edict. The 
consent decree defines many requirements of BPS, which 
includes the equitable allocation of Title I funds to service the 
needs of ELs.   
The federal consent decree enforced by META commits BPS to: 
• Improve and provide equal access to programs for EL 
students 
• Refrain from discriminating against EL students relative to 
non-ELs, in the provision of Title I services 
• Ensure proportionality in the provision of services; the 
percentage of Title I eligible but unserved EL students must 
not exceed the percentage non-ELs who are not benefiting 
from Title I funds 
• Adjust Title I school budgets for staff and services annually 
and periodically in light of changing student needs 
• Provide literacy (HILT) programs for EL students ages 8-22 
with limited or interrupted formal education (SLIFE) 
• Consult with and involve EL parents in each school 
(additional guidance on how to document this consultation 
will follow) 
• Report annually on the status of Title I services to EL 
students. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 3 of 19 
 
 
Note:  
• All other district purchasing guidelines still apply. For 
general information regarding purchasing, please refer to 
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07. 
• For state guidance on the use of Title I Part A funds in 
general (not specific to the additional requirements 
pursuant to the consent decree), visit 
https://www.doe.mass.edu/federalgrants/titlei-a/ or contact 
the BPS Grants Department.  
2. ENGLISH LEARNER EQUITY REQUIREMENT 
The portion of Title 1 resources for EL students is based on the 
percentage of EL population in that school.  
EL Equity Amount example: If School-A receives $100,000 in Title 
I funding with a school population consisting of 25% ELs, $25,000 
must be spent to benefit ELs. In this example, $25,000 is the “EL 
Equity amount” that must be spent on supplemental services 
directly and solely benefitting ELs.   
As part of the BPS annual Budget Collaborative process, the 
Finance Department provides each school their Title I allocation 
and identifies for schools the EL Equity Amount subject to the 
spending guidelines outlined in this circular.  
• A school’s Title I allocation is determined based on the 
school’s percentage of direct certified students and 
projected enrollment, multiplied by a per pupil amount. 
Direct certification, in compliance with USED and DESE, 
includes data from the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 4 of 19 
 
 
Program (SNAP), Temporary Assistance for Needy Families 
(TANF), and Medicaid enrollment.  
• Within the school’s Title I allocation, the EL Equity Amount is 
separately identified. This is calculated based on the 
projected enrollment of English Learner students as a 
percentage of the overall enrollment of projected students 
at each school. 
3. GENERAL GUIDELINES 
The META Consent Decree requires the following: 
1) Each individual school must determine the additional 
services for EL students that will supplement their 
instruction, either for academic language in English and/or 
through native language supports. 
2) This determination must be conducted prior to spending 
Title I funds for ELs at a school.  
3) These services must be supplemental, solely benefit ELs, 
and be tailored to meet the specific needs of EL students.  
4) The district, through the Office of English Learners, as part of 
its monitoring duties under the META Consent Decree, is 
obliged to ensure compliance with these legal 
requirements, including working with schools to make 
appropriate revisions to any budget that does not reflect 
compliance with Title I and META Consent Decree 
requirements. 
5) Each school must annually submit both a plan for spending 
prior to any expenditures as well as an annual checklist that 
reports the use of Title I for ELs funds.  
Services Tailored to Meet the Specific Needs of ELs 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 5 of 19 
 
 
Services provided with the use of Title I EL funds need to be 
tailored to meet the specific linguistic, cultural, socio-emotional 
and academic needs of ELs. These needs should be identified as 
part of the needs assessment process required by the consent 
decree. 
Services Solely Benefitting ELs 
Title I expenditures for ELs are also required to solely benefit ELs. 
This means, for instance, if a school desires to fund a position, the 
responsibilities for that position must be solely dedicated to ELs.   
There is an expectation that the services provided by the staff 
should focus on EL students with the highest needs such as 
those with English language development (ELD) levels 1 and 2, as 
they are the most vulnerable group of students requiring 
supplemental services.  
4. SAMPLE ACCEPTABLE USES 
Supplement and Not Supplant Rule 
Title I for ELs funds must be used to supplement, and not 
supplant, local, state or federal resources available or required 
under state or federal law to meet the educational needs of ELs. 
In other words, these Title I funds should not take the place of—
supplant—public education services that are to be provided by 
law to English Learner students. Instead, these funds must be 
used to supplement requisite education services, to provide 
services that go above and beyond what is otherwise required. 
Here are a few examples:  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 6 of 19 
 
 
• Funding lunch monitors is an inappropriate use for which 
BPS was previously cited, since maintaining order in the 
lunchroom is a basic function that is not above and beyond 
what the district would do without Title I dollars and is also a 
function that does not solely benefit ELs. 
• General classroom supplies needed for everyday classroom 
instruction (e.g., paper, notebooks, white boards) would not 
constitute an allowable use of these funds, even if they only 
are used by ESL or other EL program classrooms, as the 
supplies are not supplemental in nature.  
• It would not be allowable to use these funds to purchase 
core curriculum materials — including core ESL materials — 
for English Learner students. 
• Equally important is that even if an expenditure is 
supplemental by nature, it would be a violation of the 
“supplement, not supplant” rule to fund a service or activity 
for ELs out of the TItle I for ELs funds while also funding the 
same service or activity with general funds for other 
students at the school. For example, if a school purchases 
technology with general funds for general education 
classrooms, it would generally not be allowable to use the 
Title I EL funds to purchase the same technology for English 
Learner program classrooms. Potential allowances may be 
made if the technology is provided on a 1:1 basis for ELs only, 
and not for students as a whole. 
Note: The consent decree allows for an important exception to 
the “supplement, not supplant” rule: generally, expenditures 
related to the High Intensity for Literacy Training for Students 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 7 of 19 
 
 
with Limited or Interrupted Formal Education (HILT for SLIFE) 
program constitute an allowable use of these Title I EL funds. 
The following table provides a list of sample acceptable uses of 
Title I for ELs funds.  
• It is important to note that this list is not exhaustive, and 
that the “supplement, not supplant” provision still applies. 
Additional examples are posted on the Office of English 
Learners Title I for ELs website.  
• School leaders are advised to discuss their ideas for the use 
of these funds with the Title I EL coordinator 
(Title1EL@bostonpublicschools.org) to ensure compliance. 
 
Sample Acceptable Uses of Title I Funds for English Learners 
• High Intensive Literacy Training for Students with Limited or 
Interrupted Formal Education (HILT for SLIFE) programs: 
strongly recommended to be funded through Title I for ELs 
funds. 
• Extra learning time outside of the school day: materials and 
stipends for after-school, summer, and Saturday programs 
tailored specifically to meet the needs of ELs. 
• Supplementary enrichment and accelerated curriculum 
materials for ELs. 
• Supplementary materials, including native language 
resources, that strengthen the core academic program for 
ELs in the school. 
• Supplementary counseling, pupil services, and mentoring 
services for ELs that is above and beyond what is offered to 
all students at the school. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 8 of 19 
 
 
• College and career awareness programs solely for ELs that 
are above and beyond what is offered to all students at the 
school. 
• Methods to assess the efficacy of all implemented strategies 
(such as stipends for after-school monitoring and planning 
meetings) for ELs. 
• High-quality ongoing professional development for 
teachers, administrators, paraprofessionals, parents, and/or 
pupil services personnel that is not otherwise required and 
is geared specifically towards meeting the needs of ELs. 
• Increasing EL parental involvement through literacy 
services. 
• Consulting to strengthen the core academic standards or 
the school improvement plan to meet the specific needs of 
ELs. 
• Assessment fees associated with an EL student obtaining 
the Seal of Biliteracy. 
• A supplemental bilingual paraprofessional (not for class size 
reasons) to assist former SLIFE students who exit SLIFE into 
SEI content classes but who need continuing native 
language support. 
 
Previous Findings of Non-compliance 
The following are examples of inappropriate usages of Title I to 
count towards the EL equity percentage: 
• Since ESL instruction is considered core, funding of a sole 
ESL teacher to provide ESL for all ELs in the school is 
considered supplanting. However, it is acceptable for this 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 9 of 19 
 
 
purpose if it is used to supplement the core ESL 
requirements by providing additional ESL support or 
providing smaller group instruction to students targeting 
ELs with ELD levels 1 and 2. 
• Funding instructional or other basic supplies (copy paper, 
classroom supplies, notebooks, chart paper, printer 
cartridges, etc.) are basic classroom supplies needed for any 
classroom and would therefore be a clear example of 
supplanting. Similarly, Title I EL monies may neither be used 
to satisfy the district’s minimum $1,000 supply budget per 
school nor the minimum supply to be budgeted per 
student. 
• Funding lunch monitors is an illegal use for which BPS was 
previously cited, since maintaining order in the lunchroom is 
a basic function and not above and beyond what the district 
would do without Title I dollars.  
• Title I EL funds may not be applied to the salaries of general 
administrative personnel. 
• Shifting a position from general funds that is a core position 
to Title I is a clear indication of supplanting and not an 
appropriate Title I EL expenditure. 
• Funding positions that serve the whole school, such as 
family and community outreach coordinator, physical 
education, computer, music/art teacher, school wide 
counselors, school wide literacy coordinators, school wide 
paraprofessionals, and parent coordinators/liaisons would 
be considered supplanting and therefore would not be an 
allowable use of these funds. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 10 of 19 
 
 
5. ANNUAL REPORTING OF TITLE I SERVICES  
Title I funding for ELs is reported annually to META by the Office 
of English Learners (OEL). School leaders must submit a Title I EL 
Budget Plan (1) during  their Budget Collaborative during January 
and a Title I for ELs Budget Monitoring Checklist by June of the 
current school year to OEL. Using this Title I checklist, school 
leaders will be asked to verify and report what services the Title I 
funded staff have provided, number of students serviced, and 
additional resources/supplies purchased within the year.  
Title I EL Budget Plan (future year budget): Each school will 
receive a Title I EL Budget Plan that is pre-populated with the 
schools’ Title I EL allocation for the upcoming fiscal year. The Title 
I EL Budget Plan requires school leaders to identify the needs 
assessment that undergirds their planned spending, and to 
identify categories of planned spending (e.g., staffing, 
supplemental instructional supplies, contractual services, 
stipends, etc.). 
During a school’s budget collaborative, each school leader is to 
submit their EL Budget Plan.  A school’s budget collaborative will 
not be considered approved until the school’s Title I EL Budget 
Plan is finalized and the budget lines can be structured 
accordingly in FutureForce. School leaders are encouraged to 
schedule appointments with their EL school support liaison for 
support.  
 
(1) Template. May be updated with feedback from stakeholders. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 11 of 19 
 
 
The following represents general considerations for school 
leaders to aid them in preparing sufficient plans:  
Needs Assessment 
● The META consent decree specifies that, prior to spending 
Title I for ELs funds at schools, the determination of the 
services most needed by the school’s ELs must be 
conducted first to ensure that the funds will be used to 
support the language development needs of English 
Learner students.  
● Schools should review multiple data points to identify the 
needs of their English Learner student population, keeping 
in mind that English Learners do not constitute a monolithic 
group. 
● At a minimum, English Learner students’ ACCESS 
performance and progress data should be reviewed. 
Additional data to be reviewed may include: MCAS and 
interim/formative assessment data; attendance data; 
student/parent surveys; school Equity Roundtable notes; 
students’ Individual Learning Plans for SLIFE or ELs who 
have not met ACCESS benchmarks; etc. 
○ Schools should disaggregate the data for different EL 
subgroups; e.g., EL students with disabilities, Students 
with Limited or Interrupted Formal Education, 
newcomers, long-term English Learners, etc.  
● School leaders should consult the LATF and other EL 
teachers as well as with English Learner parents when 
developing their Title I EL Budget Plan. School leaders may 
also consider consulting with English Learner students. 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 12 of 19 
 
 
● When considering the types of goods and services to 
include in their Title I EL Budget Plan, school leaders should 
also consider the effectiveness of purchases made with prior 
Title I EL funds on improving EL student achievement. 
Budgeting for an FTE 
● If requesting an ESL FTE, make sure the minimum ESL FTE 
requirement is met within your general funds before 
submitting an additional request on your EL Title 1 
allocation. This should only be a supplemental position. This 
FTE cannot deliver core ESL instruction to meet minimum 
ESL instructional compliance. 
● Identify how the position primarily serves ELD 1 and 2 
students if applicable. 
● Both salary and benefits need to be accounted for. 
● It will be the school leader’s responsibility to ensure that this 
FTE does not perform job responsibilities other than those 
approved with the use of the Title I EL funds. 
 
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 13 of 19 
 
 
Budgeting for Stipends 
● If requesting stipends for supplemental EL instructional 
support outside of school hours, make sure that staff are 
appropriately qualified (e.g., ESL license, SEI endorsement, 
bilingual endorsement) to instruct ELs. Specify the nature of 
the services provided to demonstrate that core ESL 
instruction is not being delivered through these stipends.  
● Additionally, LATF duties are not permitted to be 
compensated through these stipends. Ensure that all 
stipend requests adhere to district policy. 
Budgeting for Contractual Services 
● If requesting contractual services for professional 
development, make sure to demonstrate that the PD 
provider is appropriately qualified to provide training on 
English Learner instruction and that the PD is specific to 
English Learner instruction or supports.  
● Schools can review the OEL website to identify other 
approved professional development that can be targeted for 
students or parents to integrate native language and 
cultural learning opportunities as part of the school PD 
offerings. 
Budgeting for Supplies/Materials/Technology 
● If requesting technology, make sure the technology is not 
already in the school being used by non-ELs and that it is 
not used for mandated assessments (e.g., ACCESS, MCAS).  
● If you’re requesting books/instructional materials, make sure 
to indicate how this supplements the requisite or core 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 14 of 19 
 
 
curriculum and how it is specifically designed for English 
Learners. 
The following provides a sample exemplar for the type of 
rationale that needs to be included in the Title I EL Budget Plan. 
QUESTION: How is this supplemental?  
● Weak Rationale: This text is supplemental because it is in 
addition to the core work.  
● Strong Rationale: This text provides a brief, accessible guide 
to this textbook to make the content comprehensible to 
ELs, especially EL 1 and 2 students. This is a supplement to 
traditional textbook and primary source materials for 
teaching this class. Newcomer students often haven't been 
taught this curriculum, so it is even more important to 
communicate the essentials of this work (which many 
general education students might already have learned).  
○ Difference: This differs from the weak example because 
it includes detail on how the text will be used in the 
classroom and demonstrates supplemental use.  
QUESTION: How will this solely benefit ELs?   
● Weak: This will only be used for ELs. ELDs 1-3. 
● Strong: This text has allowed me to make the content 
accessible, especially for ELs with ELD levels 1-3. Newcomer 
students often haven't been taught this curriculum, so it is 
even more important to communicate the essentials of this 
work (which many general education students might 
already have learned).   
○ Difference: This differs from the weak example because 
it shows that non-EL students would not benefit from 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 15 of 19 
 
 
this book and that the ELs would need the book to help 
them access the content and narrative. 
QUESTION: How is this tailored to meet the needs of your EL 
students?  
● Weak: This text is only used in ESL specific classrooms.  
● Strong: The visual and shorter, chunked text provides 
comprehensible input for students to master the concepts 
in the traditional reading. This topic is especially important 
for this time period both because my newcomer students 
consistently express interest in learning about these two 
events and because there are so many events within this 
time period that a supplemental text would help students 
follow the narrative. 
○ Difference: This differs from the weak example because 
it demonstrates how the text is tailored to meet the 
language needs of the EL students by stating it has 
visuals and shorter texts.  
Title I EL Budget Monitoring Checklist (current year actual 
spending): Whereas the Title I EL Budget Plan identifies the 
intended use of the funds, the Title I EL Budget Monitoring 
Checklist identifies how the funds were actually spent and 
provides the rationale to demonstrate how the identified goals 
within the Title I EL Budget Plan from the previous year were 
met.  Once the district’s spending deadline has passed, the Title I 
EL coordinator provides each school leader with their own 
checklist document that is pre-populated with each line item of 
requisitions and stipends. Prior to the close of the school year, 
school leaders review the rationale they provided at the time of 
the purchase request, sign the document, and return it to the 
Title I EL coordinator. 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 16 of 19 
 
 
MONITORING COMPLIANCE 
The district submits each school’s Title I EL Budget Plan and Title 
I EL Budget Monitoring Checklist to META attorneys. Note: In the 
event a school leader fails to comply with the submission 
deadlines, the district may not process purchase requests that 
fall under the school’s Title I EL budget lines until such 
compliance is met. 
The Title I EL funds are denoted in a school or department’s Fund 
200 budget with a program code of 24xx. For instance, for FY23, 
the budget line would include BPS23150 (Title I) and a program 
code of 24xx (e.g., 2401). The use of these funds is subject to the 
terms of the META consent decree and this circular. 
Throughout the school year, the Title I EL coordinator 
(title1EL@bostonpublicschools.org) will review each requisition 
for purchase (e.g., requisitions, stipends, EAEs, FTEs, budget 
transfers, etc.) to ensure that the given request meets Title I EL 
spending guidelines and aligns to the school’s approved Title I EL 
Budget Plan. The Title I EL coordinator tracks each purchase and 
its rationale for annual reporting purposes. 
● When a given request has not been included in a school’s 
Title I EL Budget Plan, the Title I EL coordinator will request 
additional information from the school to ensure 
compliance.  
● The Budget and Finance departments will not process any 
requests without prior written approval from the Title I EL 
coordinator. 
The Title I EL coordinator may also request additional information 
throughout the school year when necessary to ensure that 
spending remains in compliance. The district reserves the right to 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 17 of 19 
 
 
implement additional monitoring requirements throughout the 
school year. 
Timely spending: Responsibility Centers receive monthly BAIS 
Financials output reports that identify the balance of available 
Title I EL funds. It is the responsibility of school leaders and 
department heads to ensure that funds are spent appropriately 
and in a timely manner to support the unique needs of English 
Learner students most effectively.  
● To ensure appropriate spending, all unspent Title I EL funds 
at the school level will be re-allocated to the Office of 
English Learners at the close of the fiscal year for 
appropriate spend- down. 
META visits and requests for information: META monitors 
compliance by way of reviewing the Title I EL Budget Plans and 
the end-of-year Title I EL Budget Monitoring Checklists, as well as 
conducting school visits. During the visit, META will meet with 
the school team and may review the school’s current and 
projected budget, Title I checklist, staff qualifications, and other 
information deemed necessary to comply with the Consent 
Decree.  
● Schools will be supported by the Office of English Learners 
and Grants Department prior to any such visits.  
● School personnel who receive direct contact from META 
attorneys with requests for information outside the context 
of a scheduled visit are directed to contact the BPS Office of 
Legal Advisor at legal@bostonpublicschools.org for 
guidance. 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 18 of 19 
 
 
KEY DATES 
Responsible 
Activity 
Date 
School Leader 
Submit FY25 Title I EL 
Budget Plan (planned 
expenditures for the 
following school year) to 
Title I EL Coordinator for 
approval 
Dec. 2023/Jan. 2024 
(prior to Budget 
Collaborative) 
OEL  
Review and approve 
submitted FY25 Title I 
EL Budget Plan 
(planned expenditures 
for the following school 
year)  
Dec. 2023/Jan. 2024 
(prior to Budget 
Collaborative) 
Office of Legal 
Advisor 
Submit annual Title I 
report to META 
January 2024 
School Leader 
Submit FY24 Title I EL 
Checklist to OEL/Grants 
(accounting of 
expenditures from the 
current school year) 
June 2024 (after 
spending deadline) 
September 2024 (if 
applicable, for any 
2024 summer 
spending) 
OEL  
Review and analyze 
submitted FY24 Title I 
EL Checklist to 
OEL/Grants   
July 2024   
 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 19 of 19 
 
 
RESOURCES 
Title I for English Learners website: 
https://www.bostonpublicschools.org/title1el.  
Guidance is also included annually in the district’s Budget 
Collaborative and Probable Organization guidance document for 
school leaders. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Executive Director, or  
Director of Grants and External Funds 
Department: 
Office of English Learners or Finance 
Department 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9435 or 617-635-6995 
Email: 
all-acad-division@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
     Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
EL-07 
Version 01 
 
BPS INSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM AND MONITORING FOR  
MULTILINGUAL LEARNERS  
 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
This superintendent’s circular outlines the district’s instructional 
system and monitoring for multilingual learners, including:  
1. Instructional Expectations and Resources:  
a. Defining high-quality instructional expectations and 
materials for our multilingual learners and multilingual 
learners with disabilities (MLWD) 
b. Curating and outlining resources for schools, classroom 
staff, and school leaders to change and improve 
current practices in classrooms serving Multilingual 
learners and those with disabilities  
2. Monitoring of Multilingual Learners’ Instruction:  
a. Monitoring Individualized Learning Plans (ILPs) for 
multilingual learners who have not met ACCESS 
progress benchmarks  


Page 2:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 2 of 18 
 
b. Conducting classroom observations by school leaders 
and district regional support teams or ESL and content 
instruction across programs serving Multilingual 
learners  
In accordance with the DOJ agreement for ELE services, an 
overview of ELE services, compliance monitoring, accountability, 
and DOJ reporting schedule is outlined here.  
 
INSTRUCTIONAL EXPECTATIONS  
The circular provides foundational information on practices and 
expectations regarding high-quality instruction and grade-level 
content instruction for our MLs aligned to MA-DESE frameworks 
and grade-level standards. Included are resources for classroom 
staff and school leaders to align and improve current classroom 
practices. The research-based resources and strategies will 
provide consistent, high-quality educational practices across the 
District to develop a systemwide understanding of expectations 
for instructing our multilingual learners and those with 
disabilities.  
One priority of the Office of Multilingual and Multicultural 
Education (OMME) is to outline instructional expectations with 
guidance and resources for multilingual learner (ML) educators to 
accelerate MLs’ language acquisition and support their growth 
across content. All MLs are entitled to meaningful access to 
grade-level content learning and English language development 
(ELD) instruction to build their English language skills in all four 
language domains (reading, writing, listening, and speaking). All 


Page 3:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 3 of 18 
 
MLs regardless of program or placement are entitled to receive 
sheltered content with an SEI teacher and ESL services with an 
ESL-certified teacher1. To that end, OMME is committed to 
providing all ESL and SEI content teachers with tools that best 
support MLs.  
 
GROUNDING THE INSTRUCTIONAL CORE IN WIDA AND MA 
CURRICULUM FRAMEWORKS  
To maintain high-quality content and language learning for MLs, 
it is paramount to center all ML instruction for Fall 2023 and 
beyond on research-based standards for language development 
as well as grade-level content. OMME expects that the MA 
Curriculum Frameworks and WIDA 2020 Standards Framework 
are the foundations for all effective delivery of English as a 
Second Language (ESL) instruction and English Learner 
Education programs.  
OMME has created clear and explicit guidance around what 
defines English as a Second Language (ESL) instruction in Boston 
Public Schools (BPS) and the varied programmatic structures it 
may take. ESL is its own subject matter and provides explicit, 
systematic, and sustained language instruction to promote MLs’ 
success at school and beyond. ESL is: 
 
1 Any core academic teacher of an Multilingual Learner (providing instruction in English): teachers of 
MLs with moderate disabilities; teachers of MLs with severe disabilities; teachers in English, reading or 
language arts; mathematics, science; civics and government, economics, history, and geography; early 
childhood and elementary teachers who teach MLs such subjects; and any career vocational technical 
teacher who instructs a ML. 


Page 4:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 4 of 18 
 
 
• Asset-based and culturally sustaining  
• Language driven  
• Balanced, focused on both meaning and form 
• Standards-based (i.e. ELA, History, Math, Science), rigorous, 
and integrated  
• Designed for authentic language interactions, dialogue, and 
collaboration 
• Planned and dynamic  
• Differentiated and scaffolded 
• Grounded in effective assessment practices 
 
Successful pedagogy is grounded in these frameworks and 
approaches:  
● MA Curriculum Frameworks: The frameworks establish clear 
academic expectations for what students should know and 
be able to do at the end of each school year. They 
emphasize the development of 21st-century skills with 
college and career readiness. Current curriculum 
frameworks for each content area can be found here.  
○ English Language Arts & Literacy  
○ Social Studies / Humanities  
○ Science Technology & Engineering  
○ World Language Standards  
● WIDA: A research-based, comprehensive approach to 


Page 5:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 5 of 18 
 
supporting, teaching, and assessing multilingual learners. 
The WIDA 2020 Framework and Standards prioritize equity 
of opportunity and access, integration of content and 
language, collaboration among stakeholders, and a 
functional approach to language development.  
 
Key components to effective ML teaching in the BPS:  
● Native Language : Research shows that using native 
language instruction and resources has a positive effect on 
English language development. Teachers should leverage 
students’ native-language literacy skills whenever possible 
and use that knowledge to facilitate metalinguistic 
awareness and cross-linguistic transfer. When teachers have 
a basic knowledge of students’ native language structure, 
they can better identify students’ positive and negative 
linguistic transfers. Furthermore, teachers should consider 
using native language materials to build background 
knowledge and help students transfer content-area skills 
and understandings from one language to another.  
● Collaboration Among ML Educators: BPS prioritizes teacher 
collaboration to support MLs’ success in content area 
classes and programs. “Co-Teaching ESL is a unique form of 
teacher collaboration where two teachers (an ESL and a 
grade level/content area teacher) fully share teaching 
responsibilities for a common group of students. The co-
teachers jointly plan for, deliver, and assess dedicated, 
systematic, explicit, and sustained standards-based and 
language-focused ESL instruction that connects to content 


Page 6:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 6 of 18 
 
area topics and analytical practices.” (DESE’s Quick 
Reference Guide Co-Teaching Co-Teaching ESL)  
 
MATERIALS GUIDANCE  
OMME will continue to work across academic departments to 
ensure that all materials provide scaffolding and supports for 
multilingual learners. To support this initiative, OMME has 
developed an ELD Look-For Tool that illustrates effective 
culturally and linguistically sustaining practices that are key 
instructional components for all classrooms serving Multilingual 
Learners. This tool is aligned with research-based best practices 
for MLs and to the BPS Equitable Literacy Look-Fors, and the 
Culturally Responsive Instruction Observation Protocol (CRIOP). 
In order to support the integration of content and language, 
OMME created an integrated Language Objectives writing tool 
and a series of professional development to support this initiative.  
 
Multilingual Instructional Coaches (MICs) worked throughout SY 
2022/23 to analyze district-approved tier 1 curriculum, thoroughly 
examine the WIDA 2020 Standards Framework to create a scope 
and sequence and unit maps for ESL instruction for grades K-12: 
Focus in Grades K0-2, EL Education for Grades 3-5, and StudySync 
and core content in Grades 6-12. All curriculum and support 
documents will be housed in this Boston Public Schools ESL 
Curriculum Digital Notebook.  
 
 


Page 7:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 7 of 18 
 
The work was grounded in: 
• Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary 
(DESE) Next Generation ESL Curriculum Guidance,  
• 7 Forms of Bias,  
• Culturally Responsive Teaching,  
• Systemic Functional Linguistics,  
• Equitable Literacy and Culturally and Linguistically 
Sustaining Practices,  
• the 3Ls,  
• WIDA 2020 Standards Framework, and 
• Understanding by Design (UbD). 
 
Dual Language schools have adopted a variety of authentic texts 
or trans-adapted texts / materials in the native language. OMME 
recommends usage of native language text sets aligned to grade 
level standards and units of study that meet the rigor and 
expectations for quality materials using CURATE. Additionally, the 
district recommends the following Spanish and English 
complimentary materials for dual language:  
1. Focus Transadapted Spanish Texts  
2. American Reading Company  
Other Dual Language and bilingual programs in majority BPS 
languages are provided materials in the form of authentic texts 
or transadapted texts thematically aligned to the biliteracy 
framework for the target languages that must meet grade level 
standards.  


Page 8:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 8 of 18 
 
 
In setting expectations for high-quality instruction, the District 
has a responsibility to provide district level and individualized 
coaching support for school and classroom staff. The following is 
a list of instructional recommendations with critical resources for 
teachers and school leaders serving multilingual learners and 
English learners with disabilities (ELD).  
 
SEI PROGRAMS VS. SEI CLASSROOMS  
Boston Public Schools has the highest number of MLs across the 
state. Therefore, it is expected that every BPS classroom is an SEI 
classroom (if there is at least one multilingual learner enrolled) 
with a qualified SEI teacher. Additionally, BPS offers SEI programs 
to students at ELD levels 1-3 with some language specific 
programs at specified schools to better meet the needs of 
students at ELD levels 1-3 and provide language support if the 
educator has the same language. All MLs across ELD levels and 
placement settings are expected to receive ESL instruction in 
accordance with their level, grouping per the Department of 
Justice (DOJ) and the Massachusetts Department of Elementary 
& Secondary Education (MA DESE).  
 
ESL: English as a Second Language   SCI: Sheltered Content Instruction  
NLI: Native Language Instruction  NLS: Native Language Support 
 


Page 9:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 9 of 18 
 
Program Type & 
Target  
Instructi
on Type 
BPS Instructional Expectations  
Resources 
SEI Multilingual 
Program - targeted 
for ML ELD 1-3 with 
low incidence 
languages 
✓ ESL  
✓ SCI 
● 
Grade level aligned instruction 
using district materials or 
curriculum meets MA frameworks.  
● 
Adapting or differentiation for lower 
ELD levels and/or low levels of 
literacy to accelerate learning.  
● 
Educators teach academic 
language and align to MA 
Framework content grade level 
standards and WIDA standards.  
● 
Classroom teachers collaborate and 
plan with ESL teachers.  
● 
Educators are bilingual and believe 
that the native language of 
students and families is an asset 
and promotes bilingual education.  
● 
Classroom environments are 
multicultural, engage diverse 
perspectives and experiences and 
value all students' cultural and 
linguistic backgrounds.  
● 
Student ILP (if needed) is aligned to 
WIDA Can Do and language 
domains.  
● 
ESL instructional pedagogy is 
connected thematically with a 
focus on academic language.  
● MASS 
Literacy 
Guide  
● MA DESE 
Collaboration 
Tool  
● Incorporating 
Native 
Language 
into Learning  
● BPS 
Equitable 
Literacy Look-
Fors  
● MA DESE ESL 
Model 
Curriculum 
Units  
● CGCS 3Ls: 
Learning, 
Language 
and Literacy  
● SFL Writing 
Pedagogy  
● UDL 
Guidelines  
● MA DESE’s 
Defining ESL 
Guidance  
SEI Language 
Specific Program - 
targeted for ML ELD 
1-3 with high 
incidence languages 
✓ ESL  
✓ SCI  
✓ NLS* 
SEI Inclusion 
Program - targeted 
for dually  
identified ML with 
ELD levels 1-3 and 
MLs with Disabilities 
✓ ESL  
✓ SCI  
✓ NLS* 
SEI Classrooms 
without district ELE 
Programs - targeted 
to ELD 4 and ELD 5 
and at all schools 
without an SEI 
Multilingual, 
Language Specific 
or SEI Inclusion 
Program  
 
✓ ESL  
✓ SCI  


Page 10:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 10 of 18 
 
 
 
Dual Language -  
targeted for MLs in 
ELD levels 1-3 and 
English monolingual 
students 
✓ ESL  
✓ SCI  
✓ NLI 
● 
Biliteracy skills that support each 
language and build metalinguistic 
awareness, such as teaching 
cognates.  
● 
Educators are bilingual and hold 
the belief that the native language 
of students and families is an asset.  
● 
Materials reflect authentic texts or 
are  
● 
transadapted with authors who 
reflect the linguistic and ethnic 
diversity of the target language.  
● 
The curriculum includes a 
standards-based scope and 
sequence for language and literacy 
development in English and the 
partner language for all students. 
 
● Dual 
Language 
CAL 
Guidance 
SLIFE - targeted for  
newcomer students 
with low native 
literacy  
assessments and 
gaps of education 
(Newcomer 
Program) 
✓ ESL  
✓ SCI  
✓ NLI  
✓ NLS * 
● 
Native language literacy and 
numeracy skills that develop 
students academically.  
● 
Appropriate developmental 
strategies and pedagogy that build 
on students’ schema and life 
experiences.  
● 
Educators are bilingual and hold 
the belief that the native language 
● SLIFE DESE 
Guidance 


Page 11:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 11 of 18 
 
of students and families is an asset.  
● 
Materials reflect authentic texts or 
are  
● 
transadapted with authors who 
reflect the linguistic and ethnic 
diversity of the target language.  
● 
Drawing on students’ cultures and 
identities with projects and life skills 
that connect to their communities 
and assets. 
Heritage Program -  
targeted for 
students with 
common ethnic and  
native language 
✓ NLI  
✓ ESL 
● 
Students from heritage 
backgrounds are taught target 
language across modalities aligned 
to World Language Standards.  
● 
Identity is often a major factor in 
heritage speakers/signers’ 
motivations for language learning, 
and educators must discuss identity 
issues to effectively support 
students in making the cultural 
connections described in world 
language content standards. 
● World 
Language 
Standards  
● Heritage 
Speakers' 
Guide 
 
 
MONITORING OF MULTILINGUAL LEARNERS INSTRUCTION  
In addition, this circular outlines the District's expectations for 
Central Office and school leaders regarding a quality monitoring 
system for ESL and content instruction for multilingual learners 
across English Learner Education (ELE) programs and general 
education settings. This system facilitates the District's 
identification of classrooms, programs, and schools of excellence 
so BPS can share these practices, trends and teaching pedagogy 


Page 12:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 12 of 18 
 
district-wide. In addition, routine observations will allow the 
District to identify schools and classrooms that need support for 
instructional improvement and, in some cases, intervention at a 
school, program, or classroom. The BPS monitoring system will 
ensure that students with an ILP are attended to with specific 
language goals.  
 
MONITORING OF ML INDIVIDUALIZED LEARNING PLANS (ILPS)  
Multilingual Learners that are not meeting targeted ACCESS 
progress benchmarks indicated by MA DESE are required to have 
Individual Learning Plans (ILP) (also known as a student success 
plan) that track their language growth and academic progress. 
Each year, OMME will share guidance, the list of students who 
need an ILP per DESE’s criteria, and the template document. 
LATFs will support the dissemination of information and these 
materials to teachers for completion. The ILPs should be 
completed by the student’s team of teachers, integrating how 
the student will grow across content areas. The use of the WIDA 
framework and Can Do descriptors guide the BPS ILP document 
so that the goals within each language domain of where a 
student needs to grow to move to the next level on the English 
language proficiency continuum are aligned with WIDA. A BPS 
ILP sample template can be found here.  
 
With the continued implementation of this policy, school leaders, 
LATFs and teachers are expected to:  
• Identify the areas in which identified MLs need 


Page 13:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 13 of 18 
 
improvement and establish personalized goals for 
attaining English proficiency;  
• Assess and track the progress of MLs who did not meet 
benchmarks in the identified areas in need of 
improvement;  
• Review resources and services available to assist MLs in 
the identified areas in need of improvement; and  
• Incorporate input from the parents or legal guardian of 
the identified ML.  
 
OMME is developing a systemic approach to monitoring ILPs for 
ML who have not met WIDA ACCESS Benchmarks as outlined 
below:  
• School leaders and LATFs will be notified and updated on 
the percentage of ILP completion, and OMME will 
monitor progress towards 100% completion of ILP plan;  
• ILPs should be finalized for students by October 15, 2023;  
• Schools principals and LATFs with incomplete ILPs will be 
notified by late October to follow-up; 
• Any remaining incomplete ILPs will be reflected on school 
EL plans;  
• OMME Equity and Accountability regional liaisons will 
work with school superintendents to ensure ILP 
completion for ML identified in need of a plan.  
 
MONITORING OF INSTRUCTION  
BPS recognizes that rigorous, standards-based, culturally 
affirming instruction is critical to student outcomes in our 


Page 14:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 14 of 18 
 
highest needs schools. The district will implement a consistent 
monitoring system to ensure ESL and content instruction for 
Multilingual learners and those with Disabilities receive high-
quality instruction and opportunities for accelerated learning 
across Equitable MTSS tiers.  
● The Office of Multilingual and Multicultural Education 
(OMME) is increasing staffing and instructional support in 
SY23/24 to support school leaders and educators in meeting 
consistent expectations for instructional practices for 
Multilingual Learners and those with disabilities. OMME 
multilingual instructional coaches will work to align 
instructional expectations from the district to classroom 
level with materials, role expectations, instructional 
practices, and coaching cycles.  
● OMME has adopted an updated MLs observation tool using 
the Equitable Literacy Self Reflection Tool and Learning, 
Language and Literacy observation tool with embedded 
practices that meet grade level content expectations for 
MLs. The updated MLs observation tool will be utilized 
district-wide to perform learning walks and observations 
across all ESL and content classrooms where MLs are placed 
in order to assess the quality of teaching and learning for 
Multilingual learners with a focus on Culturally and 
Linguistically Sustaining Practices (CLSP).  
● BPS district teams and schools will use the updated MLs 
observation tool replicated in Bullseye online platform for 
observers to input observation records in order to collect 
data, assess outcomes and monitor trends towards 


Page 15:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 15 of 18 
 
increased instructional improvements.  
● All district staff, school leaders and other classroom 
observers will be trained on the updated MLs observation 
tool via Bullseye online platform in order to implement 
across the system and leverage as a consistent routine 
classroom observation and monitoring tool.  
 
SCHOOL ACCOUNTABILITY  
The following outlines the District’s expectations for school 
leaders and central office regarding a quality monitoring system 
for ESL and content instruction for multilingual learners 
regardless of program or placement. It will ensure that we 
monitor schools for high-quality ML teaching practices and 
coherence across the district. OMME will add training for school 
leaders on ML instruction expectations and observation look-fors 
to better prepare them for appropriately evaluating and growing 
educators towards meeting proficient or exemplary status 
following the MA DESE Classroom Teacher Rubric.  
 
 


Page 16:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 16 of 18 
 
School leaders or assigned evaluators:  
a) Once every two weeks, school leaders are expected to 
do short observations (10-15 minutes) of all classrooms 
serving Multilingual Learners in the school. The school 
leaders should use the updated MLs observation tool to 
collect observation notes and align to district 
instructional vision.  
b) Within 48 hours of observations, school leaders should 
provide the classroom leaders with a quick note 
including a positive practice observed and a noticing or 
wondering to improve instructional practices. 
Resources aligned to expectations or improving 
instructional practices should be included with the 
noticings or wonderings.  
c) If any concerns arise from the short observation, the 
school leader should schedule an observation, 
including a one-on-one discussion with the teacher 
that offers resources, support, or coaching if available. 
d) When a school leader observes consistent classroom 
instruction below the expectations for teaching and 
learning, the school leader must have a conversation 
with the teacher and start the teacher improvement 
evaluation process. This should include expectations 
for improvement and resources to support the growth 
of the classroom staff.  
 


Page 17:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 17 of 18 
 
DISTRICT ACCOUNTABILITY  
Regional School Superintendents and District Regional Support 
Staff (District Team): 
a) Once a quarter, starting at the end of September, 
regional school superintendents and other district 
regional support staff will join school leaders to observe 
classroom practices in classrooms serving Multilingual 
Learners. The team will use the updated MLs 
observation tool to observe, record, and provide 
feedback on classroom instructional practices to 
identify trends and growth areas and monitor progress.  
b) Regional support staff conducting walkthroughs will 
be expected to record their observations in the 
centrally maintained Bullseye online platform. This will 
allow for district-wide analysis and monitoring of data 
trends. Additionally, school leaders and district staff will 
be able to monitor progress and share evidence to 
norm and validate observations.  
c) Regional school superintendents and regional support 
staff will debrief with school leaders on the day of the 
observations and discuss highlights of classroom 
instruction, how to grow pedagogically appropriate 
instructional practices, identify which instructional 
practices need support, and support is provided.  
d) Every quarter, the district team will monitor trends for 
evidence of improvement and areas of growth. The 
district team will be expected to coordinate central 


Page 18:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 18 of 18 
 
office resources, including OMME coaches, and utilize 
data to support the classroom and school’s needs 
effectively.  
e) School superintendents will work with school leaders 
who have not demonstrated progress to develop an 
action plan for improving instruction with clear metrics 
that include district support and will be reflected in 
future QSP and on school leader evaluation.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
 
Owner:  
Deputy Superintendent of Academics and Interim 
Assistant Superintendent of OMME 
Departme
nt:  
Office of Multilingual and Multicultural Education 
(OMME) 
Mailing 
Address:  
Bolling Building, 2300 Washington Street, 6th 
Floor, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone:  
617-635-9435 
Email:  
OMMEequityteam@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
EL-06 
Version 01 
 
 
 
1 
INITIAL IDENTIFICATION AND ASSESSMENT OF 
MULTILINGUAL LEARNERS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The purpose of this circular is to bring clarity and guidance 
regarding the initial identification and assessment of Multilingual 
Learners (MLs) in BPS. The district is obligated to appropriately 
assess and identify MLs as outlined in several key documents, 
including by the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and 
Secondary Education’s Guidance1, the Successor Settlement 
Agreement and META Consent Decree. To meet our obligations 
to our MLs and their families, we must ensure that all BPS 
students are correctly assessed, identified, placed, and receive 
appropriate services. 
 
 
 
1 https://www.doe.mass.edu/ele/resources/id-assess-place-
reclass.html  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 2 of 20 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. Assessment requirements 
2. Reason to suspect a student may be a Multilingual Learner 
3. Process to assess Students for Multilingual Learner status 
who have an HLS of EEE 
4. K1 School-Based English Language Proficiency Assessment 
Calendar SY 2024 
 
1. ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS 
Under federal2 and state3 law, the Boston Public Schools (BPS) 
must take appropriate steps to identify potential Multilingual 
 
2  Paragraph 28 of The Successor Agreement between the United 
States of America and the Boston Public Schools and U.S. 
Department of Education (USDOE) and U.S. Department of 
Justice (USDOJ) EL policy document entitled Dear Colleague 
Letter, English Learner Students and Limited English Proficient 
parents/guardians (01/7/2015) (referred to as “Dear Colleague 
letter” hereafter) at 
http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/letters/colleague-el-
201501.pdf.   
3 Guidance on Placement, Progress Monitoring and 
Reclassification Procedures of English Learners, Massachusetts 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education, and G. L. C. 
71A; 603 CMR 14.02. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 3 of 20 
 
Learners (MLs) in K2 through grade 12 and provide them with the 
appropriate English Learner services and supports. The initial 
identification and assessment of Multilingual Learners follows the 
requirements outlined in paragraphs 28-31 of the Successor 
Settlement Agreement: 
Successor Settlement Agreement Paragraph 28: 
A student must be referred for an English language proficiency 
assessment when the results of the Home Language Survey 
(HLS) indicate that a language other than English is: 
• The primary language used in the home, regardless of the 
language spoken by the student 
• The language most often spoken by the student, and/or 
• The language that the student first acquired. 
If the parent/guardian answered “yes” to one or more of the 
above questions, the student is required to be assessed using the 
grade-level, state-required language screening assessment. 
Please refer to the MA Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education Guidance on the Initial Identification of English 
Learners for more information on identifying and evaluating ELs. 
The Successor Agreement obligates the district to ensure that 
English language proficiency (ELP) assessments shall be 
accomplished as soon as possible, but no later than 20 days from 
the student’s enrollment during the school year, or within 20 
days or by the first day of the new school year, whichever comes 
later, if the student enrolls during the summer. During peak 
seasons, January 1 through March 15 and August 1 through 
October 31, ELP assessments shall be accomplished as soon as 
possible, but no later than 25 days. Parents/guardians shall be 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 4 of 20 
 
informed in writing of assessment results and student 
assignment options no later than 2 school days after the 
completion of the assessments. The Newcomers Assessment and 
Counseling Center provides written notice of the assessment 
scores and school choice options to the parent/guardian at the 
end of the assessment appointment. 
TABLE 1: The following table delineates the process of 
Multilingual Learner identification at the time of enrollment. It 
highlights the departments’ roles and responsibilities and their 
order in Multilingual Learner identification.  
Please note: Bolded action steps relate directly to English 
Learner identification and placement. 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 5 of 20 
 
Department 
Action Steps 
Welcome 
Center 
1. Collect and verify documents (medical forms, 
residency, birth date). 
2. Administer Home Language Survey (HLS) to all 
families to identify potential Els. 
3. Score HLS and inform families of the result. 
4. Schedule an appointment at NACC if the HLS score is 
anything other than EEE. 
5. Assign an initial case number to the student. 
Newcomers 
Assessment 
and 
Counseling 
Center 
(NACC) 
1. Interview families and collect information about 
students’ academic background. 
2. Assess K-12 students in English and determine the 
initial ELD level.  
3. Administer Native Language test to newcomer 
students in grades 3-12 in the major languages spoken 
in BPS if students indicate interrupted learning or 
limited formal education. 
4. Inform families of their program options so that they 
feel equipped to make the best choice for their child. 
5. Enter families' choices in SIS so BPS can begin the 
assignment process. 
Enrollment 
Planning 
Services 
1. Approve case for assignment. 
2. Assign a BPS identification number to the case. 
3. Review the school choices and use the NACC 
placement recommendations to assign the student to 
a school. 
4. Maintain student assignment data. 
5. Notify families by letter of their final assignment. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 6 of 20 
 
PARENT NOTIFICATION AND COUNSELING 
After scoring the assessment, assessment specialists review all 
available information (e.g., transcripts, IEP, 504 plans) collected 
from the parent/guardian during the intake interview to propose 
a program recommendation.  
Next, testers sit with the parent/guardian to inform them, in the 
language of their preference, of the results of the assessment. 
Testers use all available information collected during the 
language testing appointment to counsel the parent/guardian 
about EL programs and services (e.g., SEI, SLIFE, Dual Language, 
etc.) that are appropriate for their child's proficiency level. After 
counseling the families, testers enter scores into the student's 
case record in Aspen SIS, which generates a list of schools with 
the appropriate programs and services. The parent/guardian 
then ranks schools on their choice list and signs the school 
selection form. The tester enters the parent/guardian’s rank order 
choices into SIS, and the case is forwarded to the Welcome 
Services student assignment team. At the end of the visit, the 
family receives a copy of the documents (e.g. Notification of Initial 
Assessment Form they signed. 
2. REASON TO SUSPECT A STUDENT MAY BE AN ENGLISH 
LEARNER 
Paragraph 28 of the Successor Settlement Agreement requires 
the district to assess enrolling students whose Home Language 
Survey does not indicate a language other than English in the 
case that “there is any other reason to believe the student is not 
proficient in English.”  The district has operationalized this 
requirement as detailed in the tables in section 3.  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 7 of 20 
 
3. PROCESS TO ASSESS STUDENTS FOR ENGLISH LEARNER 
STATUS WHO HAVE AN HLS OF EEE 
Some students may be suspected of being MLs but may not have 
been identified during enrollment because of an HLS score of 
EEE. The following table outlines the action steps necessary to 
determine if such a student is an ML. 
TABLE 2:  Please see Table 2 for the process to assess students 
who have an HLS of EEE and are suspected of being Multilingual 
Learners. 
Department 
Action Steps 
School 
1. Obtain written parent permission that they would 
like to amend their HLS results in Aspen to indicate 
another language is spoken at home and that they 
would like their student tested for ELE services 
before administering testing. Parents must include 
the updated home language on their request. 
Parents must be informed that this change will 
result in testing. 
2. Submit this request to the EL-CCR with a copy of the 
updated letter of the home language survey to 
upload, or, if it is an email, please make sure the 
email is one that is stored in Aspen in the contact 
section.  
3. Attach the documentation to the EL-CCR form and 
forward these items to the Office of Multilingual and 
Multicultural Education at 
ommeequityteam@bostonpublicschools.org.  


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 8 of 20 
 
Department 
Action Steps 
OMME Equity 
and 
Accountability 
4. Review EL-CCR submission for a first language 
change request and either approve or deny based 
on meeting requirements for submission. 
5. Inform school of EL-CCR decision. 
School 
6. Wait for an approval email and for the HLS results to 
be changed in Aspen. Please do not test the student 
until you have received approval from OMME.   
7. Test the student with the WIDA Screener. You must 
administer the test to the student in person with a 
trained test administrator.  
8. Enter the test results in Aspen under the language 
tab. 
9. Submit another request to the EL-CCR for the 
student to have an ELD level and include the results 
of the test in the upload of documentation. 
OMME Equity 
and 
Accountability 
10. Review EL-CCR submission for a NEL to EL request 
and either approve or deny based on meeting 
requirements for submission. 
11. Inform school of EL-CCR decision. 
School 
12. Schedule student for ELE services appropriate to 
their ELP. 
 
TABLE 3: The following table outlines the steps that must be 
taken before assessing a student’s potential Multilingual Learner 
Status based on their Home Language Survey Score. 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 9 of 20 
 
HLS Result 
Procedure 
OEE/EOE/E
EO 
Parent/ 
Guardian 
Permission 
Required? 
YES: Welcome Center explains testing 
implications of Home Language Survey results 
during the enrollment process. 
Action 
Steps 
1. Student is identified as a potential ML 
upon registration via the Home Language 
Survey at the Welcome Center. 
2. Student case is transferred to NACC 
where the family is interviewed and 
student is assessed. 
3. Student is assigned. 
4. Student receives ACCESS testing annually 
until they meet exit criteria.  
OEE/EOE/E
EO 
 
But 
student 
tested 
proficient 
during 
testing at 
the time of 
enrollment 
Parent/ 
Guardian 
Permission 
Required? 
YES: Schools must contact the parent/guardian 
and inform them they have concerns based on 
evidence (i.e., academic performance, test 
results) and want to assess their student. The 
school must document all meetings and 
information shared with parents and include 
them in the ELD folder. 
Action 
Steps 
1. Parent/guardian(s) must put in writing 
that they would like to have their student 
reassessed. Please inform the parent that 
this may lead to their student being 
identified as a Multilingual Learner (ML) 
which will result in EL services being 
required and an annual ACCESS 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 10 of 20 
 
HLS Result 
Procedure 
assessment. 
2. If the parent/guardian(s) agree, test the 
student with the appropriate WIDA 
assessment. You must administer the test 
to the student in person with a trained 
test administrator.  
3. Enter the test results in Aspen under the 
LEP Testing Template. Contact NACC with 
questions about the LEP Testing 
Template. 
4. Submit a request to the EL-CCR for the 
student to have a NEL to EL change, and 
include the parent’s documentation, 
school documentation, and results of the 
test in the upload of documentation. 
 
TABLE 4: The following table outlines which test a trained test 
administrator should administer to a student who may be a 
potential Multilingual Learner.  
Please note: A grade level begins on July 1st of the summer 
before entering a grade and ends on June 30th of the year of 
completing that grade.  
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 11 of 20 
 
Student 
Grade Level 
Correct Screener 
Test 
Who Can Administer 
K1 
WIDA Screener 
for Kindergarten  
(2 domains) 
Teachers currently certified in WIDA 
Screener for Kindergarten (include TIII 
Parent Notification of Initial 
Identification) 
Currently enrolled K1 students are 
tested annually beginning April 15 for 
K2 seats in the upcoming school year. 
K2  
First half of 
the school 
year  
 
WIDA Screener 
for Kindergarten  
(2 domains) 
Teachers currently certified in WIDA 
Screener for Kindergarten (include TIII 
Parent Notification of Initial 
Identification) 
OR 
NACC by request and with appointment 
K2  
Second half 
of the school 
year (from 
Tuesday 
after MLK 
day) 
WIDA Screener 
for Kindergarten   
(4 domains) 
 
Teachers currently certified in WIDA 
Screener for Kindergarten (include TIII 
Parent Notification of Initial 
Identification) 
OR 
NACC by request and with appointment 
1 
First half of 
the school 
year (until 
Friday 
Before MLK 
WIDA Screener 
for Kindergarten   
(4 domains) 
Teachers currently certified in WIDA 
Screener for Kindergarten (include TIII 
Parent Notification of Initial 
Identification) 
OR 
NACC by request and with appointment 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 12 of 20 
 
Student 
Grade Level 
Correct Screener 
Test 
Who Can Administer 
Day) 
1 
Second half 
of the school 
year  
(from 
Tuesday 
after MLK 
Day) 
WIDA Screener 
Online 
Teachers currently certified in WIDA 
Screener Online  (include TIII Parent 
Notification of Initial Identification) 
OR 
NACC by request and with appointment 
3-12 
With 1 or 2 
years in 
district 
WIDA Screener 
Online & Native 
Language 
Assessment 
NACC only 
3-12  
With 3 or 
more years 
in district 
WIDA Screener 
Online 
Teachers currently certified in WIDA 
Screener Online (include TIII Parent 
Notification of Initial Identification) 
OR 
NACC by request and with appointment 
 
 
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 13 of 20 
 
TABLE 5: The following table outlines when ACCESS Testing is 
appropriate for Multilingual Learners. 
Student Details 
Administer ACCESS Test? 
A student is a suspected ML but has not 
been confirmed as a Multilingual 
Learner. 
No.  Do not administer ACCESS. 
Instead, follow the steps to 
confirm a suspected EL outlined 
in Table 1. 
A student is a confirmed ML based on 
the correct screener test. (Steps for 
identifying correct screener test 
outlined in Table 2). 
Yes.  Administer ACCESS. 
A student is a confirmed ML based on 
the correct screener test BUT has opted 
out of some or all English Learner 
services. (Steps for identifying correct 
screener test outlined in Table 2). 
Yes.  Administer ACCESS. 
A student scored Proficient on the 
correct screener test. (Steps for 
identifying correct screener test 
outlined in Table 2). 
No.  Do not administer ACCESS. 
 A student scored Proficient on ACCESS 
the previous year 
No.  Do not administer ACCESS. 
 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 14 of 20 
 
4. K1 SCHOOL-BASED ENGLISH LANGUAGE PROFICIENCY 
ASSESSMENT CALENDAR SY 2024 
Every year, school-based designated testers assess approximately 
1,300 K1 students under the training and guidance of NACC. To 
ensure that all K1 students identified as Multilingual Learners 
(MLs) receive the related services and programs in SY 2023-2024, 
we ask schools to carefully review, prepare for, and adhere to the 
assessment calendar below.  
TABLE 6: 
Action Steps 
Instructions 
Date(s) 
STEP 1 
Convene Language 
Assessment Team 
School staff should review their K1 roster 
to start developing their assessment 
schedule: 
Following NACC training, schools will 
receive a list of students that need to be 
assessed. Schools should carefully review 
this list. 
If a school suspects a student should be 
on the list to be assessed because a 
language other than English is spoken in 
the home, the LAT should convene to 
determine if the student is eligible for 
testing. Contact NACC and the OMME 
Instruction Team if you have any 
questions about this.   
Although explicit parental consent is not 
03/01/24 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 15 of 20 
 
Action Steps 
Instructions 
Date(s) 
required, schools should meet with 
parents/guardians to discuss concerns 
and inform them of the plan to assess 
students with the grade level required 
language screener (WIDA screener for 
K1). This communication allows the 
families to have meaningful access to 
their child’s education.  
STEP 2 
Identify designated 
testers 
The principal identifies the staff 
members who will administer the 
English language proficiency 
assessment. School leader should submit 
the name of the school-based 
designated tester on this form.  
The designated testers should be 
licensed teachers or licensed staff 
members who are experienced EL 
educators.   
It is recommended that schools select 
their Language Acquisition Team 
facilitators (LAT-F), ESL teachers, and K1 
teachers familiar with the students as the 
designated testers. 
Beginning April 15th, school leaders 
provide 3 hours for K1 designated testers 
to watch the WIDA Screener for 
03/01/24 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 16 of 20 
 
Action Steps 
Instructions 
Date(s) 
Kindergarten training course and take all 
the required Quizzes on the WIDA Secure 
Portal before they come to overview 
sessions. (3 hours could be during their 
common planning time, school-based PD 
time, etc.) Designated testers should use 
the following Google Form link to submit 
their SY 2024 WIDA Certificates: Google 
Form.  
Schools with K1 programs should 
designate testers for a test 
administration overview session.  
Designated testers will receive a 
registration link for an overview session 
no later than Tuesday, April 2, 2024.  
STEP 3 
Attend training 
session 
Schools must allocate time for the 
designated testers to attend one of the 
K1 test administration overview sessions. 
All test administration overview sessions 
will take place online.  
Training is designed to support new and 
experienced testers.  
04/2/24 & 
04/03/23 
 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 17 of 20 
 
Action Steps 
Instructions 
Date(s) 
STEP 4 
Pick up materials  
Designated testers should pick up the 
testing materials after the overview 
session at NACC in the Bolling Building.  
04/04/24-
04/09/23 
 
STEP 5 
Assess identified K1 
students 
Designated testers assess all identified K1 
students with the corresponding English 
language proficiency assessment. 
Only testers who attend the training 
sessions in April can administer the 
English language proficiency 
assessments.  
To ensure appropriate test 
administration, designated testers 
cannot transfer assessment 
responsibilities or “deputize” educators 
who have not attended a SY 2024 
training session. 
Students with disabilities should be 
tested according to their IEP 
accommodations. Copies of the IEP 
accommodations should be attached to 
the students’ test booklets and 
forwarded to NACC no later than Friday, 
May 10, 2024.   
To ensure that students receive the 
05/10/24 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 18 of 20 
 
Action Steps 
Instructions 
Date(s) 
appropriate placements for the 2024-
2025 school year, K1 English language 
proficiency assessments must be 
completed no later than Friday, May 10, 
2024.  
STEP 6 
LAT-F input test 
results, return test 
answer booklets and 
requested 
documents 
LAT-F input results of English language 
proficiency assessments into Aspen SIS 
to ensure the initial ELD level and test 
results become a part of the student’s 
assessment record. All test results must 
be entered into Aspen SIS by Friday, May 
10, 2024. 
Schools must keep copies of the test 
answer sheets and a hard copy of the 
WIDA Score Report in the students’ ELD 
folders. 
If a student was screened and found NOT 
to be an EL, the school should keep the 
test answer sheet and the WIDA Score 
Report in the student’s cumulative folder.  
Schools must return all original test 
answer booklets and all requested 
documents to NACC no later than Friday, 
May 10, 2024 so that OMME can review 
the data before submitting final test 
05/10/24 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 19 of 20 
 
Action Steps 
Instructions 
Date(s) 
scores to OIIT. 
STEP 7 
 
Data Validation 
OMME will review assessment samples 
for data validation.  
OMME will inform LATFs of any errors in 
assessment scoring. Schools will be able 
to see any updates to their data in Aspen 
SIS after May 17, 2024. 
05/17/24 
STEP 8 
 
Parent Notification 
Letter 
LAT-Fs will inform the parent/guardian of 
their student’s assessment results via the 
Parent Notification Letter in the parent’s 
preferred language within two weeks 
after the assessment data is confirmed in 
Aspen SIS.  
File a signed copy of the letter in the 
student’s ELD folder. 
05/31/2024 
STEP 9 
 
K1 students 
assigned after  
05/10/24 
 
After the testing window closes on May 
10, 2024, schools must continue to assess 
all newly assigned K1 students whose 
HLS indicates any language other than 
English.   
The designated tester must borrow a 
copy of the Kindergarten Screener for 
testing K1 students from NACC. 
06/14/24 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-06 
Page 20 of 20 
 
Action Steps 
Instructions 
Date(s) 
Designated testers should follow the 
instructions in Step 4 and Step 5. 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
NACC Director 
Department: 
Office of Multilingual and Multicultural 
Education 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-1565 
Email: 
nacc@bostonpublicschools.org 
all-acad-division@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SAF-03 
Version 01 
 
LOCKER POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
Consistent with the policy outlined in Superintendent’s Circular 
SAF-02, Weapons and Objects of No Reasonable Use, this 
memorandum explains the Boston Public Schools’ policy 
regarding student locker searches. 
All students and parents must understand that lockers are the 
property of the Boston School Department, made available for 
students’ use and convenience. Lockers remain the property of 
the Boston School Department while being used by students. 
School administrators, other school department personnel, 
including but not limited to teachers, custodians, and school 
police have authority to search student lockers; any personal 
effects found within lockers; and places of concealment within 
those personal effects. Students will be held accountable for the 
contents of their lockers and the contents of their personal 
effects. Any contraband or evidence of a crime found because of 
a locker search will be turned over to the appropriate authorities.  
The information from the above paragraph is to be included in all 
school-based rules and all student handbooks. Students and 
parents must be informed that such information serves as prior 
and ample notice of the School Department’s student locker 
policy. The phrase “prior and ample notice” is to be included in 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-03 
Page 2 of 4 
 
school-based rules and student handbooks. 
In implementing the locker policy, each school must adhere to 
the following guidelines: 
1. Each school will determine its own procedure for assigning 
lockers and issuing padlocks and locker keys. This procedure 
must be included in the school-based rules and student 
handbook. Students must adhere to all school-based rules 
pertaining to locker use. 
2. Only school issued padlocks and locker keys are to be used. 
All unauthorized padlocks are to be removed immediately 
upon detection, and the locker and its contents immediately 
searched by the school leader, principal, or designee. 
3. Locker assignments are to be documented. This document 
is to contain the student’s name and the appropriate master 
key information or the padlock combination. This document 
is to be kept in a secure but readily available place in the 
main office of the school.  
4. Students are not to share lockers, unless authorized by the 
school leader, principal, or other building administrator. 
5. All unused lockers are to be cleaned out and locked or 
sealed to prevent unauthorized use. 
6. School leaders and principals will arrange for periodic 
inspection of lockers by school personnel, including at least 
one general cleanup during the school year. Personal effects 
removed from lockers are to be inventoried and reasonable 
efforts made to return property to its owners. Contraband 
and evidence of a crime is to be inventoried and turned over 
to the appropriate public safety agency. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-03 
Page 3 of 4 
 
7. School leaders, principals, and other school department 
personnel will conduct inspections of student lockers when 
it has been reasonably determined that a safety or security 
problem exists, or that there is reasonable suspicion that the 
student has evidence in the locker tending to show either a 
violation of the law or a violation of school rules. Personal 
effects are to be inventoried and reasonable efforts made to 
return property to its owner. Contraband and evidence of a 
crime is to be inventoried and turned over to the 
appropriate public safety agency. 
8. Students whose lockers contain contraband or evidence of a 
crime will be subject to the provisions of the Code of 
Conduct and to the applicable criminal statutes. If 
contraband or evidence of a crime is confiscated from a 
student's locker, procedures detailed in Superintendent 
Circular SAF-02, Weapons and Objects of No Reasonable 
Use, cited above are to be followed. 
 
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-03 
Page 4 of 4 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Deputy Chief of Safety 
Department: 
Safety Services 
Mailing Address: 
213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000 
Fax: 
617-635-8006 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SAF-09 
Version 01 
 
 LOST CHILDREN PROCEDURES      
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
From time to time, students may be “lost” — that is, a student 
leaves home in the morning but does not arrive at school, or a 
student arrives at school but is missing later in the day, or the 
student may leave school at dismissal and not arrive at home.  The 
following are standard procedures to follow whenever any of these 
scenarios should happen. 
STANDARD PROCEDURES 
The first receiver of information will: 
 
• Gather as much information as possible from the person 
reporting the lost child, including name, student number, 
school address and phone number, bus stop, bus number, 
names of friends/classmates, if known, clothing description, 
and the name and phone number of the caller. 
• Notify Safety Services: Inform the safety specialist assigned or 
present at the building, and they will inform BSP dispatch. If 
there is not a safety specialist at the school, the designated 
school staff should call Safety Services dispatch at 617-635-
8000 to initiate immediate support.  
• Notify the appropriate official: operational leader and school 
superintendent. 
• Notify the principal/head of school and/or program director. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-09 
Page 2 of 9 
 
 
The principal/head of school or program director will:  
• Contact the student’s parent/guardian. 
• Contact teacher(s), student(s), and other(s) who may have 
information about the lost student. 
The operational leader or the school superintendent will: 
 
• Make every effort to assist in locating the student. 
• Once the child is located, arrange to get the child home.  BPS 
Transportation may be used as needed, subject to availability. 
• Notify the first receiver of information and principal/head of 
school of the child's school that the child is located. 
Safety Services will: 
• Notify Boston Police and assist in coordinating the search 
process for lost children. 
• If a transported student, call the bus company (who in turn will 
call the bus driver) and check students who travel on the same 
bus. 
• Notify the Superintendent's Office. 
 
 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-09 
Page 3 of 9 
 
IF LATE SITUATION: 
Safety Services will: 
• Coordinate search process for lost children 
• Update parent/guardian of the situation and assure him/her of 
continued efforts   
• Provide parents/guardians with telephone numbers of central 
Transportation and Safety Services as additional resources  
• If the student is transported, call the bus company, who in turn 
will call the bus driver, and check students who travel on the 
same bus 
• Notify the Superintendent's Office 
• Notify the Boston Police Department 
• Notify the first receiver of information, principal/head of school, 
Transportation, and Superintendent’s Office that the child is 
located. 
If the Boston Police Department finds a child wandering, it informs 
BPS Safety Services of the located child. Boston Police will arrange 
to get the child home. 
IMPORTANT TELEPHONE NUMBERS 
Boston Police Department ............................. 911 
BPS Department of Safety Services ........... 617-635-8000 
Assistant Superintendent  .............................. 617 293-7048                   
Central Transportation ...................................... 617-635-9520 
 
 
 
Transdev (Bus Company) ................................. 617-603-7800  
Superintendent’s Office ................................... 617-635-9050 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-09 
Page 4 of 9 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Safety 
Department: 
Safety Services 
Mailing Address: 
213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, MA  02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000 
Fax: 
617-635-8006 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-09 
Page 5 of 9 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-09 
Page 6 of 9 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
INCIDENT REPORT 
 
Obtain as much of the following information as possible: 
Received by:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Date:  
 
 
 
  Time:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Child’s Name:   
 
 
 
 
 Student # 
 
 
 
Speaks English:  ☐Yes  ☐No    Language:  
 
 
 
 
     
Spec. Needs  ☐Yes   ☐No 
Name of Parent/Guardian:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
School:  
 
 
 
 Grade:  
 
  Dismissal Time:  
 
 
Address:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phone # (Home):  
 
 
 
  (Emergency):   
 
 
 
Place of Incident:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Bus #  
 
 
Description of Incident   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Need Medical Help? ☐Yes   ☐No   Type of Help?  
 
 
 
 
Request for Medical Transportation?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Student Sent to Hospital? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parent Contacted?  
 
 
 
 
 Time?  
 
 
 
Names of Child’s Friends/Classmates/Witness  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Use next page for additional information) 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-09 
Page 7 of 9 
 
Notified Parties 
 
Parent/Guardian: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parent/Guardian’s Signature:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
School Leader:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
School Leader Signature:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Safety Notified/Time: 
  Contact Person: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
School Supt’s Office Notified/Time:   
 
 
Contact Person: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
----------  End of the Incident  Report ---------- 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-09 
Page 8 of 9 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
LOST CHILD REPORT 
Obtain as much of the following information as possible: 
Received by:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Date:  
 
 
 
  Time:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Child’s Name:   
 
 
 
 
 Student # 
 
 
 
Speaks English:  ☐Yes  ☐No    Language:  
 
 
 
 
     
Spec. Needs  ☐Yes   ☐No 
Name of Parent/Guardian:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
School:  
 
 
 
 Grade:  
 
  Dismissal Time:  
 
 
Address:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phone # (Home):  
 
 
 
  (Emergency):   
 
 
 
Place of Incident:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Bus #  
 
 
Description of Incident   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Need Medical Help? ☐Yes   ☐No   Type of Help?  
 
 
 
 
Request for Medical Transportation?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Student Sent to Hospital? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parent Contacted?  
 
 
 
 
 Time?  
 
 
 
Names of Child’s Friends/Classmates/Witness  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Use next page for additional information) 
Caller’s Information 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-09 
Page 9 of 9 
 
Caller’s Name:   
 
 
 
 
 Phone #  
 
 
 
Relationship to Child   
☐ Parent  ☐ Other     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
Specify:  Relative (Aunt, Grandfather, etc.), Friend, Teacher, etc 
 
Notify the Following Parties: 
☐  Principal / Head of School  
Notified Time     
 
 
  
☐ Safety:  635-8000   
Notified Time     
 
 
 
☐  Operational Leader 
Notified Time     
 
 
 
☐ Boston Police: 911*  
Notified Time     
 
 
 
 *(If child not found within 1 hour of drop-off or by 4:30 p.m. or if 
warranted by other circumstances) 
 
Important Telephone Numbers: 
Welcome Centers: 
• Dorchester   635-8015  
• East Boston   635-9597  
• Roxbury   635-9010  
• Roslindale   635-8040 
TransDev (Bus Company): 
• Readville Yard  532-2580 
• Washington St. Yard  532-2560 
• Charlestown Yard  532-2550 
• Freeport St. Yard  532-2570 
 
☐ Resolved    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
Date/Time 
----------  End of the Lost Child Report ---------- 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER:  
SAF-04 
Version 01 
 
INCIDENT DATA AND NOTIFICATIONS                         
 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
 
It is Boston Public Schools’ policy that all building administrators 
and responsibility center managers report all incidents 
completely, promptly, and accurately to the Department of 
Safety Services and appropriate public safety agencies. 
Administrators and responsibility center managers must be 
aware that often an incident occurring at one site may 
precipitate a similar or related incident at another site. Timely 
reporting of incidents will help ensure a prompt and appropriate 
response by the School Department, public safety agencies, and 
other agencies whose support may be required. 
 
In addition to reporting all incidents to the Department of Safety 
Services, building administrators and responsibility center 
managers must report all serious incidents to the 
Superintendent’s Office and to the appropriate assistant 
superintendent. Serious incidents are considered to be those that 
require or precipitate the assistance of the Police Department, 
Fire Department, Emergency Medical Services, or the 
Department of Children and Families in other than a routine and 
ancillary manner. Any situation that could result in the request 
for the closing of a school building is also to be considered a 
serious incident reportable to the Superintendent’s Office and 
the appropriate assistant superintendent. Since personnel from 
the superintendent’s staff work with city officials to address 
many of these issues and the Office of Communications 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-04 
Page 2 of 4 
 
coordinates responses to media inquiries, it is imperative that the 
Superintendent’s Office be notified of serious incidents in a 
timely manner. 
 
Building administrators and responsibility center managers must 
immediately notify the appropriate public safety agency by way 
of the 911 emergency telephone line of any situation that poses 
imminent danger. These calls should be made by the on-site 
administrator or manager using conventional or cellular 
telephones. The School Department’s two-way radio system is 
not designed to access 911 emergency services and should only 
be used when conventional or cellular telephones are 
unavailable.   
 
When accessing emergency services through the enhanced 911 
system, the caller must give the complete address, succinctly 
state the nature of the problem, and follow any instructions 
issued by the dispatcher.   
 
The following chart lists some typical incidents occurring on 
School Department grounds, and the appropriate order of 
notifications to be made. 
 
 
Incident 
Order of Notification 
Arrest 
Department of Safety Services, Police 
Arson (or Attempt to 
Burn) 
Fire, Department of Safety Services, 
Facilities 
Assault 
Department of Safety Services, Police 
Bomb Threat 
Police, Department of Safety Services, 
Superintendent’s Office 
Demonstration 
Police, Department of Safety Services, 
Superintendent’s Office 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-04 
Page 3 of 4 
 
Drug Possession 
Department of Safety Services, Police 
Extortion 
Department of Safety Services, Police 
Facility Damage 
Facilities, Superintendent’s Office, 
Department of Safety Services 
Larceny 
Department of Safety Services, Police, 
Facilities 
Fire (No matter how 
small) 
Fire, Department of Safety Services, 
Facilities 
Medical Emergency 
EMS, Department of Safety 
Services,Superintendent’s Office (if 
major event) 
Police Assistance 
(Unspecified) 
Department of Safety Services, Police 
Robbery 
Department of Safety Services, Police 
Sex Offense 
Department of Safety Services, Police, 
Superintendent’s Office, Equity 
School Closings 
(Emergency) 
Superintendent’s Office, Department of 
Safety Services, Police 
Technical Assistance 
(Safety and Security) 
Department of Safety Services, Facilities 
Threats 
Department of Safety Services, BPD 
School Unit 
Trespassers 
Department of Safety Services, Police 
Vandalism 
Department of Safety Services, Facilities 
Weapons 
Department of Safety Services, Police 
 
Administrators and responsibility center managers are to note 
that requests from the media or from other parties for incident 
reports, written statements, or other documents should be 
referred to the Office of Legal Advisor at 617-635-9320. 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-04 
Page 4 of 4 
 
School leaders, principals, and program directors are reminded 
that they are required to sign off on all incident reports prepared 
by School Department employees (excluding Safety Services 
reports), including but not limited to teachers and other school 
staff. 
 
For related information, refer to: 
● Superintendent’s Circular FMT-12, Report of Loss or Damage 
Resulting from Fire, Theft, Vandalism, or Unlawful Acts  
● Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01, School Safety / 
Contingency Plans 
● Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02, Fire Safety Practices. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
 
Owner: 
Deputy Chief of Safety 
Department: 
Safety Services 
Mailing 
Address: 
213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, MA  02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000 
Fax: 
617-635-8006 
E-mail: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SAF-12 
Version 01 
 
SCHOOL ACCESS CONTROL 
 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
AMENDMENT FOR SY 2024-2025:  
The safety, health, and wellness of our students, staff, and 
families is our highest priority at Boston Public Schools. 
Parents/guardians are asked to drop off and pick up their 
students on the exterior of the school building at the area(s) 
designated by your school leader/staff. 
● Parents/guardians should contact their school directly, via 
phone or email, to schedule any discussion or virtual 
appointments that they would like to have on behalf of their 
student. 
● If a student is sick or injured and needs to be picked up, 
school staff will contact the parent/guardian to make 
arrangements and escort the student to meet the 
authorized adult. School staff will verify identification of the 
individual prior to releasing the student via exterior camera 
and intercom.  
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-12 
Page 2 of 7 
 
SAFETY PROTOCOLS PERTAINING TO INDIVIDUALS IN AND 
OUTSIDE THE FACILITY 
If school staff have safety concerns pertaining to an individual 
outside or inside the facility, they should immediately contact the 
Department of Safety Services/Boston at 617-635-8000. In the 
case of any imminent threat to student or staff safety, the Boston 
Police Department should be notified immediately by dialing 911. 
The Boston Public Schools Safety Services Department should 
also be notified by dialing 617-635-8000. 
Each school in the district must, through its School Safety 
Contingency Plan, have clear and comprehensive school access 
control protocols in place. School access control plans must 
adhere to the following: 
● Ensure that only those students, staff and others who are 
authorized to be in the school building are admitted to the 
facility. 
● Require all staff (school based, central office, 
contractors/vendors, etc.) to wear and prominently display 
their BPS identification cards at all times while on school 
property and during school-based activities (e.g., field trips, 
school assemblies, outdoor activities). All staff are also 
required to follow all school access protocols and 
procedures as outlined in this circular.  
● Employ a standard operating procedure that all doors to the 
school building are locked and secured at all times, while 
simultaneously allowing for appropriate egress from inside 
the building.   
● School secretaries and other staff should NOT admit any 
visitor to the building until they can reasonably ascertain the 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-12 
Page 3 of 7 
 
identity of the individual seeking entrance and the reason for 
entry. Staff must use an intercom, camera buzzers and 
monitors to assist them with observing and communicating 
with any individual seeking access to the facility. 
● Secretaries and other staff should NOT allow (buzz in) people 
in without knowing or asking the visitor the reason for being 
at the school. The camera buzzer shall be used to identify the 
person and the reason for their visit before allowing them to 
enter school premises “Hello, how can you help you, do you 
have an appointment?,... please indicate the reason for your 
visit and the person who is hosting you during your visit…” 
● Post appropriate signs directing visitors to the main office. 
● Any staff member that finds a person in a school building 
without an appropriate visitor pass or BPS ID is encouraged 
to inquire of the person’s business or reason for being there. 
The person should be directed to the main office for further 
assistance. If the person may be creating an unsafe 
environment, please follow the procedure as outlined above 
under “Important Note.” 
● ALL staff should inform the designee at the main office in 
the event they are expecting a visitor and provide name and 
reason prior to the visitor’s arrival. In the event a family 
member, partner, or friend is dropping something off for a 
staff member, the main office designee MUST obtain verbal 
confirmation from the employee PRIOR to allow access to 
the facility per this circular. If verification cannot be 
obtained, the individual is not to be allowed in the facility.  
REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL VISITORS 
● Upon admittance, report immediately to the main office 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-12 
Page 4 of 7 
 
(staff allowing entrance to the facility should confirm arrival 
to the main office and sign-in etc.). 
● Present photo identification.  
● If an individual cannot produce a photo ID, staff should 
request another form of identification and/or gain 
confirmation from school staff that the person is known to 
the school. If additional support is needed to confirm 
identification, staff should obtain support from the head of 
school/principal or designee before authorizing a visit to 
continue. 
● Sign the visitor’s log, including full name, time in and time 
out, reason for visit, and affiliation (i.e., student, vendor, 
department, agency etc.). Please see Superintendent 
Circular LGL-04, School Visitors Guidelines. 
● After completing the sign-in process, all visitors are to 
remain in the main office, or designated area, while waiting 
for staff escort to appointments or meetings. All visitors 
must be in an area attended by staff to avoid any 
unauthorized movement through the building for the 
duration of their visit. 
● If an authorized visitor states that they are wearing an ankle 
monitor or staff observes an ankle monitor on a visitor, staff 
should follow the procedures outlined above.   
 
HEAD OF THE SCHOOL AND FACULTY  
● Mandate that ALL visitors to the building be issued and 
prominently display a visitor identification badge received at 
the time of sign-in at the main office.  
● Identify designated meeting space, close to the main office, 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-12 
Page 5 of 7 
 
to prevent visitors from moving throughout the building. 
Classroom access should be limited to special events and 
open houses.  
● Ensure the safety and security of students and the integrity 
of the school building entrances during recess, physical 
education, and activities that might occur outdoors, and 
during student arrival and dismissal times, by assigning staff 
to closely monitor all aspects of the movement of students 
and any open doors to accommodate transition in and out 
of the building. 
● Prohibit prospective BPS employees from beginning their 
work until they have been fully hired, and therefore CORI 
and SORI cleared by the Office of Human Capital. 
● Demand that any facilities and physical plant contractors 
slated to work in the building prominently display their 
green BPS identification cards, which demonstrate that they 
have been CORI and SORI cleared.  
● Prohibit staff (including all vendors, contractors, and staff 
from other departments), students, or others from 
“propping open” doors or creating other potential 
inconspicuous means of unauthorized entry into the school 
building. 
District personnel will look for these elements when reviewing 
school safety plans. In addition, specialists from BPS Safety 
Services will conduct proactive site visits to assist and provide 
input and support on school access control. 
School safe mode and internal threat procedures should be 
explicitly planned, discussed, and documented by all staff 
members.  In addition to conducting evacuation procedure drills, 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-12 
Page 6 of 7 
 
school safe mode drills must be conducted in September and 
January of each school year (see Supt. Circular FSE-08, Safe Mode 
and Internal Threat Drill Procedures). 
All staff members must exercise extreme vigilance regarding 
school building security: remain alert for trespassers, unsecured 
doors, and/or suspicious persons or activity around the school. 
School employees should not compromise their own safety or 
that of students when undertaking these security measures. 
Sound judgment and reasonable action by all school-based 
personnel are expected. Any potential threats to student or staff 
safety should be reported at once to the principal/head of school 
or their designee (in the event they are out of the building).   
RELATED SUPERINTENDENT CIRCULARS 
● LGL-04 School Visitor Guidelines 
● FSE-01 School Safety Contingency Plans 
● SAF-07 Metal Detectors 
● SAF-08 Release of Students to Authorized Persons 
● SAF-11 Sexual Offender Registry Information (S.O.R.I.) 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-12 
Page 7 of 7 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Safety 
Department: 
Safety Services 
Mailing Address: 
213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000 
Fax: 
617-635-8006 
Email: 
Operations-Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SAF-02 
Version 01 
 
WEAPONS AND OBJECTS OF NO REASONABLE USE 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
The Code of Conduct lists as grounds for suspension or expulsion 
the possession of any dangerous weapon, including but not 
limited to a firearm, knife, razor blade, club, explosive, taser, stun 
gun mace/pepper spray, tear gas, brass knuckles, studded 
bracelet, other dangerous weapons, or dangerous objects of no 
reasonable use to the student at school. (See Code of Conduct 
Sections 7.4 and 14.13).  
Heads of school and principals should note that as of January 
1999, the Boston City Council enacted an ordinance restricting 
the sale, possession, and use of laser pointer devices (Ord. 1999 c. 
2 § 4)). As a result of that ordinance, persons under twenty-one 
years of age are prohibited from possessing any laser pointer 
device on any school property within the City of Boston. Laser 
pens and other laser pointer devices are considered to be objects 
of no reasonable use within the meaning of the Code of Conduct. 
Students found in possession of such devices are subject to the 
provisions of Section 7.4 of the code. Students may also be 
subject to non-criminal court proceedings, under MGL, c.40, 
s.21D. 
Heads of school and principals must communicate to students 
that the possession of any weapon or object of no reasonable use 
in school, on the way to school, or during school-related activities 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-02 
Page 2 of 4 
 
is strictly forbidden, and that violations of this rule will be dealt 
with appropriately. Students must also be advised that under 
certain circumstances when evidence exists of serious 
misconduct outside of school — for example, a student’s being 
charged with or convicted of a felony, such that the student’s 
continued presence in school will have a substantial detrimental 
effect on the general welfare of the school — these shall be 
considered school related offenses and shall be dealt with in 
accordance with Section 7.0 of the Code of Conduct.  
Heads of school and principals must incorporate salient and 
pertinent information from the above two paragraphs into all 
school-based rules and student handbooks. Students and 
parents must be informed that such information serves as prior 
and ample notice of the School Department’s policy regarding 
weapons and other objects of no reasonable use. The phrase 
“prior and ample notice" is to be included in school-based rules 
and student handbooks. 
The Educational Reform Act of 1993 requires that all student 
handbooks include the following information. Such information is 
to be incorporated into all school-based rules as well. 
1. Any student found in possession of a dangerous weapon, 
including but not limited to a firearm or a knife; or found in 
possession of a controlled substance, including but not 
limited to marijuana, cocaine, or heroin, on school premises 
or at a school sponsored or school related event, including 
athletic games, may be subject to expulsion. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-02 
Page 3 of 4 
 
2. Any student who assaults a staff member on school 
grounds, or at a school sponsored, or school related event, 
including athletic games, may be subject to expulsion.  
Massachusetts law requires all school staff personnel to report in 
writing to their immediate supervisor any incident involving a 
student’s possession or use of a dangerous weapon on school 
premises, (MGL, c.71, s.31 L). Refer to MGL, c.269, s.10 and the Code 
of Conduct for definitions of dangerous weapons. 
If a dangerous weapon or an object of no reasonable use is 
confiscated, the following steps are to be taken: 
1. Each item is to be kept in the possession of the 
administrator, who will notify the Department of Safety 
Services immediately upon confiscation. If the item is a 
firearm, the Boston Police are to be immediately notified by 
telephone, using the 911 emergency line. School Department 
personnel will comply with subsequent instructions issued 
by the police. 
2. Safety Services will hold items, other than firearms, making 
them available for hearings, conferences, and court 
proceedings for a reasonable period. 
3. Following any parental conferences and court proceedings, 
items which are classified as dangerous weapons under 
MGL, c. 269, s.10 or MGL, c. 140, s.131 J shall be turned over to 
the Boston Police by the Department of Safety Services. 
4. In no instances will a dangerous weapon or an object of no 
reasonable use be returned to a student. The Department of 
Safety Services will be responsible for returning any 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-02 
Page 4 of 4 
 
property not classified as a dangerous weapon to the parent 
or legal guardian upon written request. 
5. Objects of no reasonable use not claimed by a parent or 
guardian within a reasonable period will be turned over to 
the Boston Police Department for destruction.  
All staff members are expected to meet the same standards that 
hold for students. Employees of the Boston Public School are 
prohibited from bringing firearms or other dangerous weapons 
onto school property at any time.  Except for law enforcement 
officials, it is a violation under federal and state law for anyone to 
bring a firearm, loaded or unloaded, into an elementary school, a 
secondary school, or a college or university, even if that person is 
otherwise licensed to carry a firearm. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Deputy Chief of Safety 
Department: 
Safety Services 
Mailing Address: 
213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, MA  02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000 
Fax: 
617-635-8006 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER:  
SAF-04 
Version 01 
 
INCIDENT DATA AND NOTIFICATIONS                         
 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
 
It is Boston Public Schools’ policy that all building administrators 
and responsibility center managers report all incidents 
completely, promptly, and accurately to the Department of 
Safety Services and appropriate public safety agencies. 
Administrators and responsibility center managers must be 
aware that often an incident occurring at one site may 
precipitate a similar or related incident at another site. Timely 
reporting of incidents will help ensure a prompt and appropriate 
response by the School Department, public safety agencies, and 
other agencies whose support may be required. 
 
In addition to reporting all incidents to the Department of Safety 
Services, building administrators and responsibility center 
managers must report all serious incidents to the 
Superintendent’s Office and to the appropriate assistant 
superintendent. Serious incidents are considered to be those that 
require or precipitate the assistance of the Police Department, 
Fire Department, Emergency Medical Services, or the 
Department of Children and Families in other than a routine and 
ancillary manner. Any situation that could result in the request 
for the closing of a school building is also to be considered a 
serious incident reportable to the Superintendent’s Office and 
the appropriate assistant superintendent. Since personnel from 
the superintendent’s staff work with city officials to address 
many of these issues and the Office of Communications 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-04 
Page 2 of 4 
 
coordinates responses to media inquiries, it is imperative that the 
Superintendent’s Office be notified of serious incidents in a 
timely manner. 
 
Building administrators and responsibility center managers must 
immediately notify the appropriate public safety agency by way 
of the 911 emergency telephone line of any situation that poses 
imminent danger. These calls should be made by the on-site 
administrator or manager using conventional or cellular 
telephones. The School Department’s two-way radio system is 
not designed to access 911 emergency services and should only 
be used when conventional or cellular telephones are 
unavailable.   
 
When accessing emergency services through the enhanced 911 
system, the caller must give the complete address, succinctly 
state the nature of the problem, and follow any instructions 
issued by the dispatcher.   
 
The following chart lists some typical incidents occurring on 
School Department grounds, and the appropriate order of 
notifications to be made. 
 
 
Incident 
Order of Notification 
Arrest 
Department of Safety Services, Police 
Arson (or Attempt to 
Burn) 
Fire, Department of Safety Services, 
Facilities 
Assault 
Department of Safety Services, Police 
Bomb Threat 
Police, Department of Safety Services, 
Superintendent’s Office 
Demonstration 
Police, Department of Safety Services, 
Superintendent’s Office 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-04 
Page 3 of 4 
 
Drug Possession 
Department of Safety Services, Police 
Extortion 
Department of Safety Services, Police 
Facility Damage 
Facilities, Superintendent’s Office, 
Department of Safety Services 
Larceny 
Department of Safety Services, Police, 
Facilities 
Fire (No matter how 
small) 
Fire, Department of Safety Services, 
Facilities 
Medical Emergency 
EMS, Department of Safety 
Services,Superintendent’s Office (if 
major event) 
Police Assistance 
(Unspecified) 
Department of Safety Services, Police 
Robbery 
Department of Safety Services, Police 
Sex Offense 
Department of Safety Services, Police, 
Superintendent’s Office, Equity 
School Closings 
(Emergency) 
Superintendent’s Office, Department of 
Safety Services, Police 
Technical Assistance 
(Safety and Security) 
Department of Safety Services, Facilities 
Threats 
Department of Safety Services, BPD 
School Unit 
Trespassers 
Department of Safety Services, Police 
Vandalism 
Department of Safety Services, Facilities 
Weapons 
Department of Safety Services, Police 
 
Administrators and responsibility center managers are to note 
that requests from the media or from other parties for incident 
reports, written statements, or other documents should be 
referred to the Office of Legal Advisor at 617-635-9320. 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-04 
Page 4 of 4 
 
School leaders, principals, and program directors are reminded 
that they are required to sign off on all incident reports prepared 
by School Department employees (excluding Safety Services 
reports), including but not limited to teachers and other school 
staff. 
 
For related information, refer to: 
● Superintendent’s Circular FMT-12, Report of Loss or Damage 
Resulting from Fire, Theft, Vandalism, or Unlawful Acts  
● Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01, School Safety / 
Contingency Plans 
● Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02, Fire Safety Practices. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
 
Owner: 
Deputy Chief of Safety 
Department: 
Safety Services 
Mailing 
Address: 
213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, MA  02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000 
Fax: 
617-635-8006 
E-mail: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SAF-08 
Version 01 
 
RELEASE OF STUDENTS TO AUTHORIZED PERSONS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
School leaders/principals must use extraordinary care in releasing 
a child to a parent or guardian. Such care should be further 
emphasized when an administrator has been informed that a 
court order exists prohibiting release of that child to a certain 
person or persons.  It is essential to exercise extreme caution in 
this area to prevent a parent or guardian from attempting to 
remove a child from school. It is both essential and mandatory 
that school leaders/principals regularly update the Student 
Emergency Information Card (Form 460). 
If telephone notification is received from a parent or guardian to 
release a student to a third party, it is the responsibility of the 
building administrator to verify.  A suggested procedure is to ask 
for the telephone number from which the party is calling, cross-
check that number with the information from the emergency 
card, and then call the party back at that number. 
School leaders/principals must require proper identification from 
any person removing a child from school.  No child is to be 
released to anyone other than a custodial parent without the 
parent's consent and proper identification. 
School leaders/principals should note that the Department of 
Children and Families (DCF) has statutory authority to take 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-08 
Page 2 of 5 
 
immediate custody of any child if DCF has reasonable cause to 
believe that such action is necessary to protect the child from 
abuse or neglect.  In such cases, the child will be brought before 
the court on the next business day. Such emergency measures 
are usually taken without the consent of the parent.  However, 
before school leaders/principals release any child to an agent of 
the DCF, the agent should be required to present their official 
photo identification and prepare a simple signed statement to 
the effect that the Department of Children and Families is 
exercising its authority to take immediate custody of the child on 
the grounds of suspected abuse or neglect. 
Under no circumstances should a child be sent to any location by 
way of a taxicab, or any other transportation service based solely 
on notification received by telephone. 
School leaders/principals having doubts about the release of a 
student should immediately contact the Boston Police 
Department by calling 911 and Boston Public Schools Safety 
Services Department at 617-635-8000. 
There are some situations in which parents have authorized a 
third party to transport their children to or from school on a 
regular basis in a van, bus, or some vehicle other than that 
assigned by the BPS Transportation Department. School leaders, 
principals, and program directors must obtain written permission 
from such parents authorizing alternative transportation 
arrangements.  The attached form, Parent Permission to Release 
Student to Authorized Persons, must be completed by the parent 
before administrators put a child into a vehicle operated by a 
third party. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-08 
Page 3 of 5 
 
It is important to record the name of the driver, the name of the 
bus company (if applicable), the type of vehicle, and the vehicle 
registration number.  School leaders, principals, and program 
directors are to retain a copy of each completed form. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Office of Legal Advisor Director 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
OR 
Owner: 
Chief of Safety 
Department: 
Safety Services 
Mailing Address: 
213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, MA  02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000 
Fax: 
617-635-8006 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-08 
Page 4 of 5 
 
PARENT PERMISSION TO RELEASE STUDENT TO 
AUTHORIZED PERSONS 
 
The Boston School Department is concerned about the safety 
and wellbeing of all students and consequently will release a 
child to a third party (someone other than the parent or legal 
guardian) only with the parent’s or guardian’s written 
authorization.  If you plan to release your child to a third party, 
you must complete this form and return it to the principal of 
your child’s school. 
 
Date_____________________________ 
I, as parent or guardian, give permission for [print name of 
student] 
 
to be transported to and/or from the [print name of school] 
 
 
 
by [name of third-party driver] 
         
from [start date] _________________ to [end date] 
. 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-08 
Page 5 of 5 
 
I further understand that [name of third-party driver]  
________________________________________ will be responsible for my 
child’s transportation services and safety.  I release the Boston 
School Department from any liability in case of any accident, 
injury, and/or other claim as a result of the Boston School 
Department releasing my child to the person or agency named 
above. 
Signature of Parent/Guardian: 
 
Home/Cell Phone Number: 
 
Work Phone Number: 
 
Address: 
 
 
 
Name of third-party company or individual: 
 
 
Phone Number: 
 
Type of vehicle (check as appropriate):   
☐ Van      ☐ Bus      ☐ Automobile      ☐ Other Vehicle 
Vehicle Registration Number: 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SAF-01 
Version 01 
 
STUDENT SEARCH PROCEDURES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
 
School leaders, principals, and other administrative personnel are 
responsible for enforcing the Student Code of Conduct and for 
establishing a safe and secure environment for learning in the 
schools under their supervision. The United States Supreme 
Court in the case of New Jersey v. T.L.O., 469 U. S. 325 (1985) has 
issued a decision that affects how school personnel may enforce 
school rules and maintain an atmosphere conducive to teaching 
and learning. 
The Supreme Court’s decision established constitutional 
standards for student searches by school officials and school 
employees. Specifically, the Court ruled that the Fourth 
Amendment to the United States Constitution, which prohibits 
unreasonable searches and seizures by government employees, 
is not violated when public school administrators and teachers 
conduct student searches if there are reasonable grounds to 
believe that the search will yield evidence of either a violation of 
law, a violation of school rules, or both. 
In announcing its ruling, the Court rejected the school board’s 
argument that school officials, like parents, are exempt from the 
requirements of the Fourth Amendment. At the same time, the 
Court rejected the student’s claim that school officials must 
obtain warrants or meet the more rigorous “probable cause” 
standard, applicable to searches by law enforcement officials, 
before conducting student searches on school property. Rather, 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-01 
Page 2 of 6 
 
the Court struck a balance between the student’s legitimate 
expectations of privacy in the school setting and the school’s 
equally legitimate need to maintain an environment in which 
learning can take place. The Court held that the “legality of a 
search of a student should depend simply on the reasonableness, 
under all the circumstances, of the search.”   
To be legal, a student search must be reasonable in two respects. 
First there must be reasonable suspicion to believe that the 
student has in their possession evidence tending to show either a 
violation of law or a violation of school rules. To reasonably 
suspect something, school officials must have facts of sufficient 
quantity and certainty to establish that the suspicion is likely to 
be true. Mere suspicion, hearsay, or a single isolated fact, 
unsupported by further evidence, is generally not enough to 
meet the reasonable suspicion standard. Second, the scope of 
the search must be reasonable in relation to the intrusion on the 
student’s privacy. There must be a likelihood that the area 
searched will yield the item(s) being sought. 
The determination of whether a search is reasonable is a 
question of judgment without definite benchmarks. School 
officials must exercise common sense and good judgment to 
ensure that student searches conform to the “reasonableness” 
standard.  
In conducting student searches, school personnel should adhere 
to the following guidelines: 
1. Only administrators who are authorized under Boston 
Public Schools’ Code of Conduct to suspend students from 
school should conduct student searches. The authority to 
conduct student searches should be limited to school 
leaders, principals, other administrative officials, and 
personnel specifically designated by school leaders, heads of 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-01 
Page 3 of 6 
 
schools, principals, and other administrative personnel to 
suspend students. 
2. If the school administrator believes that a student may have 
in their possession a firearm, weapon, dangerous object, or 
drugs, or otherwise fears that a search would jeopardize 
their safety, the administrator should not search the student 
until the student has notified the Safety Services 
Department to be present during the search. 
It should be noted that the Supreme Court specifically did 
not decide in the T.L.O. case what standard should apply to 
student searches conducted by school officials in 
conjunction with or at the behest of a law enforcement 
agency. However, the Court noted that the higher standard 
of “probable cause” has been applied to student searches 
involving law enforcement agencies by a lower federal 
court. Thus, it may be expected that Massachusetts courts 
will closely scrutinize student searches conducted by school 
officials in conjunction with police officers. Consequently, 
such searches may be deemed reasonable only if based 
upon the more stringent probable cause standard. However, 
the presence of a police officer or safety specialist for the 
purpose of ensuring the safety of the administrator should 
not alone trigger the higher standard. 
3. Authorized personnel should search only students of the 
same sex. All searches must be conducted in the presence 
of another staff member of the same sex, who shall serve as 
a witness. A male administrator may not search a female 
student. If a female administrator is not available to search a 
female student, the administrator may designate another 
female staff member to conduct the search. If a male 
administrator is not available to search a male student, the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-01 
Page 4 of 6 
 
administrator may designate another male staff member to 
conduct the search. It is important to emphasize that 
searches must always be done by a staff member of the 
same sex, and must always be done in the presence of a 
witness of the same sex. 
4. Before conducting a student search, the administrator must 
be confident that the reasonableness standard, as outlined 
by the T.L.O. decision (The United States Supreme Court in 
the case of New Jersey v. T.L.O., 469 U. S. 325) has been 
satisfied. 
5. The manner and method of the search should be tailored to 
the circumstances. The scope of the search normally should 
be limited to those areas and objects that could reasonably 
be expected to contain the item(s) being sought. The basis 
for the suspicion that a student possesses evidence of a 
violation of the law or school rule should increase in direct 
proportion to the extent of the intrusion upon the student’s 
privacy in conducting the search. A body search of a student 
requires a higher level of suspicion than a search of a 
student’s book bag.   
 
In determining whether and how to conduct a student 
search, school officials must consider such factors as the 
danger posed by the object being sought; the likelihood of 
the evidence being disposed of or destroyed; and the age, 
sex, and prior disciplinary record of the student. The more 
serious the threat posed by the item(s) being sought, the 
more likely a court will be to find the search reasonable. On 
the other hand, it is likely that a court would strike down a 
search that involved the wholesale rummaging through a 
student’s personal property without individualized suspicion 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-01 
Page 5 of 6 
 
that the student had violated either the law or school rules. 
Student searches must not become general and 
exploratory. 
6. School Department employees are not allowed to conduct 
strip searches. Strip searches are searches in which a 
student is asked to remove articles of clothing that could 
result in the exposure of undergarments. 
7. An administrator should never use physical force in 
attempting to conduct a search. If a student refuses to 
submit to a search, the Department of Safety Services (617-
635-8000) should be called for assistance. 
8. Searches of student lockers and desks, which remain the 
property of the Boston Public Schools while used by 
students, should be based upon reasonable grounds to 
suspect that they will yield evidence of either violation of 
law or school rules. Refer to Superintendent’s Circular SAF-
03 Locker Policy for related information. 
 
9. If a search by a school administrator yields evidence that a 
law has been violated, the administrator should notify the 
Department of Safety Services. 
School leaders/principals must incorporate salient and pertinent 
information from this memorandum into all school-based rules 
and student handbooks. Students and parents must be informed 
that such information serves as prior and ample notice of the 
School Department’s procedure for student searches. The phrase 
“prior and ample notice” is to be included in school-based rules 
and student handbooks. 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-01 
Page 6 of 6 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Legal Advisor  
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
OR 
Owner: 
Deputy Chief of Safety Services 
Department: 
Safety Services 
Mailing Address: 
213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, MA  02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000 
Fax: 
617-635-8006 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SPE-14 
Version 01 
 
 
 
NON-IEP COUNSELING GUIDELINES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
INTRODUCTION 
Counseling services are provided to Boston Public School 
students in myriad formats and modalities. Students with and 
without disabilities may receive counseling services within 
Boston Public Schools. Students with disabilities may have IEPs 
that contain counseling as a related service mandating the 
frequency and duration of counseling. Non-disabled students 
without IEPs may be participating in counseling sessions 
formulated as a result of a recommendation of the Student 
Support Team in collaboration with staff from the Behavioral 
Health Services department. As a result of partnerships with 
external agencies, counseling also may be provided to BPS 
students by mental health providers who are not BPS employees.  
With this document, the Boston Public Schools seeks to ensure a 
standard level of practice for the provision of counseling services 
so that consistent practices may be implemented in assisting 
students to overcome school-based issues which may be 
hindering their achievement.  
All mental health providers must conform with the Standards for 
School-based Mental Health Services developed in partnership 
between BPS and members of the Boston School-Based 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SPE-14 
Page 2 of 9 
 
 
 
Behavioral Health Collaborative. These standards can be 
obtained on the Boston Public Schools website at 
https://www.bostonpublicschools.org/domain/2443.  
BACKGROUND  
The American Psychological Association has defined counseling 
as a process to help individuals towards overcoming obstacles to 
their personal growth, wherever these may be encountered and 
towards achieving development of their personal growth.  
Massachusetts Department of Mental Health states further that 
mental health counselors render professional services to 
individuals, families, or groups. They apply principles, methods, 
and theories of counseling and psychotherapeutic techniques to 
define goals and develop a treatment plan of action aimed 
towards the prevention, treatment, and resolution of mental and 
emotional dysfunction.  
The American Counseling Association states that “counselors 
encourage client growth and development in ways that foster 
the client’s interest and welfare; counselors avoid fostering 
dependent counseling relationships. The ACA states further that 
“counselors practice in specialty areas new to them only after 
appropriate education, training, and supervised experience. 
While developing new skills in specialty areas, counselors take 
steps to ensure the competence of their work and to protect 
others from possible harm.”  
Boston Public Schools Counseling Work  
In addition to these standard definitions and professional ethics 
of practice, all BPS and non-BPS providers should understand 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SPE-14 
Page 3 of 9 
 
 
 
and demonstrate that their counseling work should support 
teaching and learning goals and effective teaching practices. 
Ultimately, the goal of counseling is to support success within the 
classroom. 
PRIOR TO COUNSELING  
1. The Student Support Team serves as the hub of student 
services within the school. The Student Support Team 
facilitator should have knowledge of the referral for 
counseling, and the recommendation for counseling should 
emerge from the Student Support Team. When necessary, 
counseling referrals can also be made outside of the SST 
process. 
2. The direct service provider designated to be the counseling 
provider should be clear about (1) the scope of the work 
requested in counseling, (2) the reason for the referral, and 
(3) the expected outcome in counseling. If unclear regarding 
the reason for counseling, a meeting should be scheduled 
between the counselor provider and the referring agent to 
discuss these concerns.  
3. The direct service provider should counsel students 
regarding behaviors that impact teaching and learning, 
academic achievement, and daily school functioning.  
4. Specific issues that are trauma related, i.e., physical and/or 
sexual abuse (onset being past or present), death and dying, 
and behaviors that may need psychiatric intervention and 
may necessitate a 51A Report, should be brought to the 
attention of the principal/head of school or the designated 
administrator and the direct service provider’s supervisor. 
These issues should be referred to the appropriate 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SPE-14 
Page 4 of 9 
 
 
 
community counseling agency/mental health facility.  
5. Written consent must be obtained from the student, parent, 
or legal guardian before beginning counseling (see attached 
consent form). If a student is receiving counseling through 
an outside provider, but in a BPS building, parent/guardian 
should also sign the agency specific consent form.  
6. The direct service provider must outline goals and objectives 
for the individual student (see attached form). Furthermore, 
it is recommended that the direct service provider 
formulate the goals and objectives with input from the 
parent/legal guardian.  
7. Parents/legal guardians should be informed that pertinent 
information regarding specific students may be discussed at 
the Student Support Team meetings. All ethical professional 
standards of confidentiality will be maintained regarding 
the specific nature of the counseling sessions(s).  
8. All direct service providers should maintain professional, 
proper, safe, and appropriate safeguards for the student(s) 
and themselves.  
COUNSELING PRACTICE  
All direct service providers who are counseling students should:  
● Have a consistent counseling schedule which is 
documented and provided to their principal/head of school, 
supervisor, and the needed personnel in the individual 
schools (i.e., teacher, OSS coordinator, Student Support 
coordinator, guidance counselor, and other school 
administrators). 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SPE-14 
Page 5 of 9 
 
 
 
● Meet in rooms that provide appropriate space and levels of 
confidentiality.  
● Guarantee a measure of safety and protection for the 
student and provider, including consideration of the 
distance between a counselor and student and leaving the 
door ajar at all times.  
● Not engage in any physical contact with the student(s) due 
to the possible risk of psychological harm to the student as a 
result of the physical contact (i.e., cradling, “touch therapy,” 
caressing, massaging, and petting). This requirement of no 
physical contact is due to the possibility of psychological 
and/or physical harm to the student as a result of such 
contact. 
● Document each session held and keep progress notes on 
each student. Provisions should be made for sharing themes 
of concern and critical information with the parent/legal 
guardian.  
● Share specific information that relates to the student’s 
academic progress with appropriate staff.  
● Respond to inquiries from the principal/head of school 
regarding the student’s progress in counseling.  
TERMINATING COUNSELING SERVICES  
When counseling goals and objectives have been reached and/or 
there have been several documented absences and/or instances 
of resistance by the student, as well as several documented 
attempts to provide counseling services, termination of 
counseling services may be appropriate. The direct service 
provider should:  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SPE-14 
Page 6 of 9 
 
 
 
1. Notify the student’s parent or legal guardian. 
2. Notify (in writing) appropriate school personnel 
(principal/head of school, Student Support coordinator, OSS 
coordinator, supervisor, teacher, or other school 
administrator).  
3. Summarize progress and recommendation and follow-up as 
needed (this could be facilitated during the Student Support 
Team meeting, discussions within small learning 
communities, common planning time, and/or teacher 
parent conferences).  
SUMMARY  
Direct service providers, both BPS and non-BPS staff, are an 
integral component of helping students reach their fullest 
academic achievement. Lack of knowledge or misunderstanding 
of ethical and professional practice standards are not a defense 
against charges of unethical and/or inappropriate practice 
conduct. It is important that these practice standards are 
maintained and adhered to for the safety of students and the 
direct service provider. These practice standards ensure a safe, 
protected, and ethical delivery of service for both students and 
the staff members who serve them. If it is determined that these 
guidelines have not been followed and/or that inappropriate, 
unethical and/or unprofessional conduct has occurred, Boston 
Public Schools will take any such action as is appropriate under 
the circumstances. Such action may range from discipline to 
termination from employment or termination of any contract 
with Boston Public Schools as BPS deems appropriate under the 
circumstances.  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SPE-14 
Page 7 of 9 
 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Director of Social Work  
Department: 
Social Work  
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
 617-635-8294 
Email: 
socialwork@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SPE-14 
Page 8 of 9 
 
 
 
CONSENT FOR SCHOOL-BASED NON-IEP 
COUNSELING SERVICES  
I, _________________________________________________________________ 
(Print Name of Parent/Legal Guardian) 
have been provided with the reason (s) my child,  
__________________________________________________________________  
(Print Child’s Name) 
has been recommended for school-based counseling services. 
The reason (s) for the recommended school-based counseling 
services are:  
 
 
 
I give consent for __________________________________________ 
(school name) to refer my child for the following school-based 
counseling services (check all that are applied). I understand that 
these services may be provided by a community mental health 
agency in partnership with the school.  
□    Individual Counseling  
□    Group Counseling  
 
BPS Staff Member: _______________________________________________ 
(Insert staff name) 
Outside Agency staff:  
__________________________________________________________________  
 
(Insert staff name) 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SPE-14 
Page 9 of 9 
 
 
 
I also give consent for the school to release my child’s student 
record, health, and other confidential information to the school-
based counseling service provider and for my child to participate 
in these school-based counseling services.  
I understand that my participation in my child’s school-based 
counseling services will be appreciated and strongly encouraged. 
I have read this Consent for School-Based Counseling Services 
and understand its terms. I sign it voluntarily and with full 
knowledge of its significance.  
 
___________________________________________     __________________ 
Parent/Legal Guardian Signature                      Date 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
SPE-20 
Version 01 
 
 
SPECIAL EDUCATION SCREENING PROGRAM FOR 
THREE- AND FOUR-YEAR-OLD CHILDREN 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version  
Massachusetts state law mandates that each school system in the 
state locate, identify, and provide special educational services for 
children ages three and four who may either have a substantial 
disability or possibly experience challenges in a regular preschool or 
kindergarten program. 
The Boston Public Schools will continue its ongoing screening 
program for three- and four-year-olds who are not attending a 
BPS school, to take place on the following dates: 
SCREENING DATES: 
● 
Thursday, October 17, 2024 @ CASH High School Annex, Dorchester 
● 
Wednesday, December 4, 2024 @ Mario Umana Academy, E Boston 
● 
Thursday, March 6, 2025 @ CASH High School Annex, Dorchester 
● 
Wednesday, March 26, 2025 Mario Umana Academy, East Boston 
● 
Thursday, April 17, 2025 @ CASH High School Annex, Dorchester 
 
 
This screening is available to any child, ages three and four, who 
resides in the City of Boston. The screening program, coordinated 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SPE-20 
Page 2 of 3 
 
by the Office of Special Education, includes screening in the areas 
of readiness skills and language. A parent interview is conducted 
as well. 
Notices will be available in the language of the home, when 
indicated as necessary by the family. Efforts will be made to 
disseminate notices at community centers, day care centers, and 
community preschools. 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Location 
Thursday, October 17, 2024 
CASH High School Annex, Dorchester 
Wednesday, December 4, 2024 Mario Umana Academy, East Boston 
Thursday, March 6, 2025 
CASH High School Annex, Dorchester 
Wednesday, March 26, 2025 
Mario Umana Academy, East Boston 
Thursday, April 17, 2025 
CASH High School Annex, Dorchester 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SPE-20 
Page 3 of 3 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Assistant Director for Early Childhood 
Department: 
Office of Special Education 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street 5th Floor, Roxbury, 
MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-8599 
Fax: 
617-635-6834 
Email: 
all-acad-division@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
  
 
 
  
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HWD-02 
Version 01 
 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
BACKGROUND 
Regular physical activity is one of the most important factors 
affecting health. It helps control weight, reduces the risk of 
developing cardiovascular disease and diabetes, improves mental 
health and mood, and increases longevity. Most Boston Public 
School (BPS) students are not physically active for the 60 minutes 
per day recommended by the Center for Disease Control. Only 16% 
of BPS high school students reported being physically active for 
the recommended time, and only 40% reported having weekly 
physical education, according to the 2015 Boston High School 
Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS). Twenty-three percent of 
middle school students reported being physically active for the 
recommended time and 80% reported having weekly physical 
education, according to the 2013 Boston Middle School YRBS. This 
lack of physical activity is contributing to an epidemic of 
overweight and obesity in BPS students. Measurement of 
students’ Body Mass Index in 1st, 4th, 7th and 10th grades revealed 
that 39% of BPS students are at an unhealthy weight (2015). 
  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 2 of 18 
 
Recent national, cumulative evidence shows clear links between 
school-based physical activity, including physical education, and 
academic success. Most of the studies report that physical activity 
was positively related to academic performance, including 
academic achievement (grades, standardized test scores); 
academic behavior (on-task behavior, attendance); and factors 
that can positively influence academic achievement 
(concentration, attention, improved classroom behavior). Most 
importantly, adding time during the school day for physical 
activity does not appear to take away from academic 
performance. Given these findings, the BPS recommends that 
schools increase the amount of time spent in physical education 
and/or increase the quality of their physical education program, 
provide recess and physical activity breaks in the classroom, 
promote walk/ bike to school programs, and offer non-competitive 
intramural and interscholastic sports. 
To improve health and academic outcomes, BPS is implementing 
strategies to increase the frequency and quality of physical 
education (PE) and physical activity (PA) for BPS students. A PE & 
PA Task Force was formed in November 2010 to align the district’s 
PE-related policies and bring the district into compliance with MA 
General Laws Chapter 71, Section 3 that states: 
“Physical education shall be taught as a required subject in all 
grades for all students in the public schools for the purpose of 
promoting the physical well-being of students.” 
With input from BPS principals, physical education teachers, BPS 
Wellness Council members, BPS department heads, Academic 
Superintendents, Labor Relations, and other district-leaders, the 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 3 of 18 
 
PE & PA Taskforce created the PE & PA Policy to align the former 
BPS policies. 
 
DEFINITIONS 
Comprehensive School Physical Activity Program (CSPAP): An 
approach by which school districts and schools utilize all 
opportunities for school-based physical activity to develop 
physically educated students who participate in physical activity 
each day and develop the knowledge, skills, and confidence to be 
physically active for a lifetime. Quality physical education is the 
cornerstone of a CSPAP.  CSPAP also includes school-based 
physical activity opportunities; school employee wellness and 
involvement; and family and community involvement. 
Physical Education (PE) is a planned, sequential program of 
curricula and instruction that helps students develop the 
knowledge, attitudes, motor skills, self-management skills and 
confidence needed to adopt and maintain physically active 
lifestyles. PE curricula must align with the BPS PE Frameworks. PE 
is comprehensive and includes student learning competencies 
that cross all four strands of the BPS PE Frameworks 1) Movement 
2) Health-Related Fitness 3) Personal and Social 4) Lifelong 
Physical Activity. PE activities that focus on a single activity, such 
as swimming and dance, count as PE only if it is part of a CSPAP 
and align with the BPS PE Frameworks. 
Physical Activity (PA) is a behavior consisting of bodily movement 
that requires energy expenditure above the normal physiological 
(muscular, cardiorespiratory) requirements of a typical school day. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 4 of 18 
 
Recess, movement breaks, promotional activities, and cross-
curricular incorporation are some examples of PA that should NOT 
be counted as PE; PA is not PE and it cannot be allocated as PE. 
Moderate-to-Vigorous Physical Activity (MVPA) is measured by an 
increase in heart rate, breathing, and body temperature.  
Moderate physical activity refers to activities equivalent in 
intensity to brisk walking or bicycling. Vigorous physical activity 
produces large increases in breathing or heart rate, such as 
jogging, aerobic dance or bicycling uphill. 
  
PHYSICAL EDUCATION & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY POLICY 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to a District-wide, 
strategic effort to increase all students’ physical activity and fitness 
by bringing more physical education and physical activity to 
schools; improving the quality of physical education and recess; 
and increasing the equity of physical activity programs and 
resources across our schools. Activities will be inclusive to meet 
the needs, interests, abilities and cultural diversity of all students, 
including students of all gender identities, students with 
disabilities, and students with special healthcare needs. 
Numerous studies indicate that regularly engaging in moderate-
to-vigorous exercise contributes to overall physical and mental 
health and that nurturing an exercise habit among children lays 
the foundation for lifelong fitness. Research also shows that 
increased physical activity increases children’s cognitive function, 
ability to concentrate in class, and academic performance.  Thus, 
as a part of a strategic effort to improve academic performance, 
BPS recognizes and promotes the benefits of a Comprehensive 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 5 of 18 
 
Physical Activity Program, where quality physical education is the 
cornerstone and additional physical activity is integrated 
throughout the school day and into before and after school 
programs, staff wellness and family engagement activities. 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to a strong athletics 
program that offers a variety of programs and is accessible to all 
students. Athletics participation can contribute to student fitness, 
wellness, character development and a lifelong commitment to a 
physically active lifestyle. Additionally, by establishing a safe, 
supportive and engaging school environment, athletic programs 
encourage school connectedness and create a climate where 
healthy competition and support fill the school with spirit and a 
sense of community. Research shows that healthy children are 
better learners and connected students are more likely to stay in 
school. In this way, athletics contributes to the academic success 
of students. 
In accordance with state law, all schools must provide all students 
in all grades with opportunities for physical activity. Schools must 
offer at least 150 minutes of in-school physical activity weekly in 
grades PreK-8, including required physical education, movement 
breaks, recess, or lessons involving movement structured to 
support moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA).  In grades 
PreK-8, students are expected to have at least 20 minutes of daily 
recess.  
Teachers and other school and community personnel shall not use 
physical activity (e.g., running laps, pushups) as punishment nor 
withhold opportunities for physical activity during the school day 
(including but not limited to recess, classroom physical activity 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 6 of 18 
 
breaks, or physical education) as punishment for any reason other 
than illness or safety or as approved by the school leader. This 
includes denying a student physical activity time in order to make 
up work unless under unusual circumstances. The district will 
provide teachers and other school staff with a list of ideas for 
alternative ways to discipline students. 
All schools must offer standards-based physical education (PE) for 
all students in all grades.  Schools are required to offer at least 45 
minutes of weekly PE in grades PreK-8 and at least one semester 
(equivalent of a half school year) of PE each year in grades 9-12.  
We recommend that schools provide at least 80 minutes of 
weekly PE in grades PreK-8.  In order to help schools work toward 
this recommendation, Boston Public Schools will develop an 
implementation plan with input from current principals and 
headmasters. This implementation plan will be shared with the 
School Committee. 
Teachers and other school and community personnel shall not use 
physical activity (e.g., running laps, pushups) as punishment; 
withhold opportunities for physical activity during the school day 
(including but not limited to recess, classroom physical activity 
breaks or physical education) as punishment for any reason; or 
deny a student physical activity time in order to make up work 
unless under unusual circumstances. 
Extended day programs and out of school time, which includes 
before and after school programs, are expected to offer an array of 
physical activity opportunities to ensure all students are able to 
participate. Schools shall offer opportunities for students to 
participate in physical activity before and after the school day, 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 7 of 18 
 
including extended day time, through a variety of methods 
including physical activity clubs, physical activity in before/after 
school programs, intramurals and interscholastic sports, and in 
their school commute.  
The District recognizes that students benefit from bicycle and 
pedestrian safety education to help make the trip to and from 
school safer and instill confidence in students, parents and 
community members. The District will develop and maintain 
policies and procedures for working together with city agencies, 
schools, families, and students in efforts to promote a safer and 
easier trip to and from school when students and staff are walking, 
bicycling, using public transit or other means of physically active 
transport. The District will encourage 7-12th grade students to use 
public transportation when available and appropriate for travel to 
school, and will work with the local transit agency to provide 
transit passes for eligible 7-12th grade students. The District will 
provide resources to schools, students and families regarding 
walking, riding a bicycle, using public transit or other forms of 
active transportation.  The District will encourage wellness 
councils, school administrators and students, staff, families and 
community partners to assist the District in promoting safe, 
physically active travel to and from school. Schools are 
encouraged to designate a transportation liaison to facilitate 
communication regarding District efforts to promote safe, 
physically active travel to and from school. Schools shall 
participate in student transportation surveys when requested to 
help the District plan for strategies to promote a safer and easier 
trip to and from school when walking, bicycling, using public 
transit or other means of physically active transport. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 8 of 18 
 
IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES 
A. State law requires that all students in grade K-12 receive 
physical education. 
 
1.) The BPS PE Curriculum must meet the following criteria: 
a. The curriculum is standards-based and it aligns with BPS 
PE Curriculum Frameworks. 
b. The curriculum provides moderate-to-vigorous physical 
activity (MVPA) during at least 50% of PE class time. 
c. The PE scope and sequence for each grade level must 
include district-sponsored PE curriculum, such as SPARK 
in K-12th grades and Project Adventure in K-12th grades. 
  
2.) Student assessments in PE must include the following: 
a. Graded competency (i.e. knowledge, skills, practice) and 
participation (i.e. effort, proper attire, teamwork) 
assessments that are reflected on all students’ report 
cards. 
  
3.) BPS PE classes have the following requirements for scheduling: 
a. Reflected on all schools’ master schedules and on all 
students’ report cards. 
  


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 9 of 18 
 
4.) Staffing requirements include: 
a. BPS supports a learning environment in which all teachers 
are highly qualified in the subject areas they teach. 
Therefore, PE class must be taught by a teacher that holds 
an active and valid PE teaching license from the MA 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. 
b. If a school is unable to provide all students in all grades 
with PE instruction from licensed PE teachers, they should 
contact the Office of Health and Wellness for support with 
identifying district-approved staffing alternatives.  All PE 
staffing alternatives must be approved by HR, the Office of 
Health and Wellness, and the school’s respective 
instructional superintendent.  Staffing alternatives are only 
considered in extenuating circumstances or in situations 
that increase opportunities for students. 
  
5.).  School Wellness Councils are required to develop a school-
based Comprehensive School Physical Activity Plan (CSPAP) as a 
part of the Wellness Action Plan that includes: 
a. A school-based CSPAP Policy that documents the CSPAP 
Implementation Guidelines. 
b. The CSPAP Implementation Guidelines must outline how 
all students in grades K-8 are to receive at least 45 minutes 
of PE per week, and how all students in grades 9-12 receive 
at least 1 semester of PE per grade. 
c. The CSPAP Implementation Guidelines also include a plan 
that outlines how the school aims to provide 150 minutes 
of in-school physical activity in grades k-8, including 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 10 of 18 
 
required physical education, movement breaks, recess, or 
lessons involving movement.  In grades PreK-8, students 
are expected to have a minimum of 20 minutes of daily 
recess; this must be included in the CSPAP. 
d. School staff shall be provided resources to integrate 
physical activity into their academic lessons. Contact the 
Office of Health and Wellness for resources. 
e. School wellness councils will work with building principals 
and Facilities Management/ Planning to identify safe and 
appropriate indoor and outdoor space for group physical 
activity and physical education. The lack of identified 
single-use physical activity spaces (i.e., gymnasiums) will 
not hinder schools from offering an environment 
conducive to physical activity and implementation of a 
CSPAP plan. Examples include: 
○ Shared classroom space (mobile physical education 
classes conducted in classrooms) 
○ Schoolyard 
○ Creative use of hallway space or other shared spaces 
in buildings 
○ Repurposing classroom or other building spaces for 
physical activity 
○ Co-teaching with other content areas 
  
B.  Schools shall offer daily physical activity opportunities during 
the school day.  
To that end principals/heads of school can: 
a. Integrate daily physical activity into the classroom 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 11 of 18 
 
setting with kinesthetic learning, cross-curricular 
lessons, and team teaching 
b. Encourage short physical activity breaks between 
lessons or classes, as appropriate 
c. Encourage school-wide physical activity promotions like 
pedometer challenges, field day, dance-a-thon, walk-a-
thon, active transport, etc. 
d. Provide opportunities for daily recess with at least 20 
minutes a day of supervised recess, preferably outdoors, 
during which time staff encourage moderate to 
vigorous activity and provide appropriate space and 
equipment. In grades K-8, daily recess is required. 
e. Schedule recess before lunch so that students will come 
to lunch less distracted and ready to eat. 
  
C. Schools shall offer daily physical activity opportunities during 
extended day programs and out of school time which includes 
before and after school programs.  
To that end principals/headmasters can: 
a. Allow school spaces and facilities to be available for school-
sponsored activities that promote fitness for its students 
during extended and non-school hours, as circumstances 
permit. 
b. Remain in alignment with best practices and 
requirements for licensed school-age care programs 
partnering with schools (606 CMR 7).  Specifically 
○ Providing daily indoor and outdoor time periods, 
weather permitting, which include both small and 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 12 of 18 
 
large muscle activities;      
 
○ Each school shall dedicate at least 30-60 minutes of 
morning or afterschool program time to physical 
activity for all students; 
c. Partner with local government and community-based 
agencies to support active transport to school by 
reducing/eliminating hazards and increasing accessibility 
(i.e., bicycle parking). 
  
D. Safe Routes to School Boston 
The District will encourage students to be physically active before 
and after school by promoting walking/ biking/rolling to school 
through a comprehensive Safe Routes to School Boston program, 
including encouragement, education, evaluation, 
engineering/environment, enforcement, and equity strategies. 
Schools should include Safe Routes to School in their Annual 
Wellness Action Plans. 
  
a. Equity strategies: Consider the barriers and concerns, and 
opportunities that face families and ensure equitable 
opportunities in each strategy of this initiative. 
b. Encouragement strategies: 
○ Walking Promotions (e.g. Walk to School Days, 
Walking Challenges, School-wide Promotions) 
○ Establishing a school Park and Walk site 
○ Walking School Buses 
c. Education strategies: 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 13 of 18 
 
○ Implementing an active transportation safety 
curriculum in health or physical education. 
○ Developing and disseminating preferred Walking 
Route Maps that provide students and parents with 
the additional tools to travel safely to and from 
school. 
○ Disseminating walking tips and simple pedestrian 
safety information and promotional materials. 
d. Evaluation of Need strategies: 
○ Conduct a walk audit to identify concerns regarding 
the physical/environmental conditions that surround 
your school. 
○ Conduct a travel hand tally to understand the impact 
and number of students that will benefit. 
e. Engineering/Environment strategies: 
○ Alert proper authorities regarding environmental 
safety concerns.  Engineering or other environmental 
issues should be reported through BOS: 311, other 
pressing concerns should be reported to BPS 
Transportation. 
○ Increase accessibility and support for those choosing 
to ride by installing secure bicycle storage and 
designating facilities for storing other wheeled 
devices like scooters. 
f. Enforcement strategies: Share Preferred Walking Routes 
with local police stations for proper crossing guard 
assignment and heightened awareness on popular routes. 
  
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 14 of 18 
 
E. Community Partnerships 
Providing students and families with access to safe, affordable, 
and convenient places to be physically active is an important 
strategy for promoting health and reducing risk for obesity. 
Community partners are a vital, valuable aspect of quality physical 
activity programs and can meaningfully support PE and PA in 
BPS. School officials are encouraged to work with partners to 
develop a written joint use agreement that delineates the terms 
and conditions for joint use and the responsibilities of all parties. 
Community partners must follow the BPS Community Partner 
Policy. To that end, principals/heads of school can work with 
community partners to: 
a. Secure mini-grant funding 
b. Use of facilities on and off-campus 
c. Training/professional development 
d. Assist with program implementation 
e. Work with community partners to create additional 
opportunities that meet the unique needs of their school 
  
F. Physical Activity and Punishment 
Teachers and other school and community personnel shall not: 
a. Use physical activity (e.g., running laps, pushups) as 
punishment 
b. Withhold opportunities for physical activity during the 
school day (including but not limited to recess, 
classroom physical activity breaks or physical education) 
as punishment for any reason 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 15 of 18 
 
c. Deny a student physical activity time in order to make 
up work unless under unusual circumstances 
The district will provide teachers and other school staff with a list 
of ideas for alternative ways to discipline students. 
  
MONITORING, COMPLIANCE & SUPPORT 
  
1. Monitoring Curriculum 
a. Scope and Sequence: Each school must annually 
submit a PE scope and sequence for each grade level to 
the School Wellness Councils; the scope and sequences 
must align with BPS PE Curriculum Frameworks. The 
Office of Health and Wellness can support schools in 
aligning their PE scope and sequence with the BPS PE 
Curriculum Frameworks.  If necessary, the School 
Wellness Councils may be asked to submit the school’s 
PE scope and sequence. 
 
2. Monitoring Assessments 
a. Report Cards: All students’ report cards must include a 
grade for taking PE class. 
 
3. Monitoring school-based Comprehensive School Physical 
Activity Plan (CSPAP) 
a. Wellness Actions Plans:  School Wellness Councils’ 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 16 of 18 
 
CSPAP will include their school-based CSPAP Policy 
that outlines how all students in all grades will receive 
weekly physical activity. 
b. The Office of Health and Wellness will monitor School 
Wellness Councils’ CSPAP. 
c. The Office of Health and Wellness will monitor the 
community partner’s compliance with the BPS 
Community Partner Policy.. 
 
4. Monitoring Scheduling and Graduation Requirements 
a. Master Schedules:  All schools must reflect adequate PE 
on their master schedule. 
b. Student Report Cards: All students’ report cards must 
include PE to determine compliance with the PE & PA 
Policy and to determine students’ graduation eligibility. 
 
5. Monitoring Staffing: 
a. Staffing Reports: The Office of Human Capital will 
annually conduct PE staffing reports for each school.  
The PE staffing reports will be monitored to determine 
compliance with the PE Staffing Policy for BPS. 
 
6. The Office of Health and Wellness will support schools in 
their efforts by providing: 
a. Yearly professional development opportunities for both 
physical education teachers and school-based 
personnel 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 17 of 18 
 
b. Professional development opportunities for recess-
based personnel 
c. Schools shall be provided resources to integrate 
physical activity into their academic lessons 
d. Resources available for school staff include: 
○ Field-day guides 
○ Physical Activity Curriculum 
○ Physical Activity Breaks 
○ Recess temperature recommendations 
○ Active Recess materials 
○ Guide to Before and After School Activities 
○ A list of physical activity community partners and 
contact information 
7. Schools Non-Compliant with PE & PA Policy: 
The principal and relevant school superintendent will be notified 
by the Office of Health and Wellness if a school is found not to be 
compliant. The Office of Health and Wellness will work directly 
with the school to support the development of a CSPAP 
Improvement Plan that puts the school on track for compliance 
with the PE & PA Policy.  
School administration, teachers, families, students, community-
based organizations, and wellness councils will be provided 
information about the policy to engage and support 
implementation, monitoring, and compliance. The BPS Office of 
Health and Wellness will provide an implementation guide that 
will include strategies and support for professional development, 
curriculum, partnership development, instructional materials, 
school-based PA strategies, and other resources.  


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 18 of 18 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director of Health & Wellness 
Department: Health and Wellness 
Mailing 
Address: 
370 Columbia Road, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-6643 
Email: 
healthandwellness@bostonpublicschools.org   
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
HWD-06 
Version 01 
 
 
 
TOBACCO AND NICOTINE-FREE ENVIRONMENT 
POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
BACKGROUND 
A Tobacco Policy Task Force met during the 2010-2011 school year 
to review the BPS smoking policy and develop recommendations 
for a comprehensive tobacco policy that addressed all tobacco 
products, including e-cigarettes or electronic vapor products for 
the Boston Public Schools. Task force members included 
representatives from Health Services, Facilities, Health & Wellness 
Department, School Safety, teachers, students, parents, and a 
high school head of school. The policy was updated again in the 
fall of 2019 to remain current with language around electronic 
cigarettes and best practices for vaping prevention. 
The Tobacco and Nicotine-Free Environment Policy is motivated 
by the philosophy that every staff person, student, and visitor 
should have the right to breathe clean air in their school and 
work environment and that BPS is acutely aware of the serious 
health risks associated with the use of tobacco or nicotine 
products, both to users and non-users. The policy recognizes that 
the use or promotion of tobacco or nicotine products on school 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 2 of 14 
 
 
 
grounds and at off-campus school-sponsored events is 
detrimental to the health and safety of students, staff, and 
visitors. BPS acknowledges that adult staff and visitors serve as 
role models for students and embraces its obligation to promote 
positive role models in schools, and to provide an environment 
for learning and working that is safe, healthy, and free from 
unwanted smoke and tobacco or nicotine product use, including 
vaping, for students, staff, and visitors. Therefore, a 
comprehensive policy was adopted to prohibit the use of any 
tobacco or nicotine products. The Boston Public Schools have 
prohibited smoking on school property since 1987 when the 
School Committee of the City of Boston first adopted a Smoking 
Policy. 
A Tobacco-Free Environment Policy has been developed to 
comply with and extend beyond the Massachusetts Smoke-Free 
Workplace Law (M.G.L. c. 270, § 22) and Boston’s Clean Air Works 
Workplace Smoking Restrictions Regulation. Furthermore, this 
policy has been reinforced by the Education Reform Act of 1993 
and M.G.L. c.71 § 2A.  This policy is a part of the District Wellness 
Policy (HWD-01) and Healthy School Environment Policy (HWD-
04) and is linked to the Drug and Alcohol Abuse Policy (SHS-01) 
and the Boston Public Schools Code of Conduct. Substance use 
intervention should be a part of a tiered approach that includes 
substance use prevention education for all students as a part of 
the comprehensive health education required in HWD-01. 
DEFINITIONS 
School property: Includes inside and outside both administrative 
and school buildings, sidewalks/walkways, parking lots, 
playgrounds, fields, school buses and other official vehicles, 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 3 of 14 
 
 
 
loading docks, and any other facility under BPS jurisdiction.  
Tobacco and nicotine products: Include but are not limited to 
cigarettes, cigars, cigarillos (or little cigars), clove cigarettes, loose 
tobacco, blunt wrappers, chewing tobacco (chew, dip), or any 
other product not mentioned that contains tobacco of any kind. 
It also includes any products containing nicotine such as 
dissolvable nicotine, electronic cigarettes, nicotine gel, nicotine 
water, or any other preparation of tobacco and any product or 
formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of 
nicotine that is manufactured, sold, or offered for sale, or 
otherwise distributed, with the expectation that the product or 
matter will be introduced into the human body. 
Tobacco or nicotine paraphernalia: Any device used to aid, 
ingest, light, burn, or consume tobacco products, including but 
not limited to pipes, rolling papers, lighters, and matches. This 
also includes the use of all electronic nicotine delivery systems or 
electronic smoking devices, such as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-
hookahs, e-pipes, vape pens, and advanced personal vaporizers.  
Nicotine replacement products (NRP): Products containing 
nicotine as an active ingredient that are intended to help a 
person quit smoking and are regulated through the FDA’s Center 
for Drug Evaluation and Research. Over-the-counter NRPs are 
approved for sale to people 18 years and older. The US Public 
Health Service Clinical Practice Guideline on Treating Tobacco 
Use and Dependence does not recommend NRP as a component 
of pediatric tobacco use interventions. NRPs include skin 
patches, chewing gum, and lozenges. Prescription nicotine 
replacement therapy is also available; the products are FDA-
approved only for use by adults. Electronic vapor products are 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 4 of 14 
 
 
 
not considered FDA-approved nicotine replacement products. 
POLICY 
BPS students shall not possess, use, consume, display, distribute, 
or sell any tobacco or nicotine products or tobacco or nicotine 
paraphernalia at any time on school property, at off-campus, 
school-sponsored events and extra-curricular activities, within 
vehicles located on school property, and within 50 feet of school 
property. 
BPS staff, administrators, or visitors to BPS shall not use, 
consume, display, or sell any tobacco or nicotine products or any 
tobacco or nicotine paraphernalia at any time on school property, 
at off-campus, school-sponsored events, and extra-curricular 
activities, within vehicles located on school property, and within 
50 feet of school property. 
 BPS staff and administrators shall not promote or allow the 
promotion of tobacco or nicotine products, tobacco brands, 
nicotine brands, or any tobacco or nicotine paraphernalia on 
school property, at off-campus, school-sponsored events, and 
extra-curricular activities, or within 50 feet of school property. 
This includes promotion of any corporate name, trademark, logo, 
symbol, motto, selling message, recognizable pattern of colors, or 
any other indication of product identification identical or similar 
to those used for any brand of tobacco or nicotine product 
company, or manufacturer of tobacco or nicotine products 
through the use of any gear, bags, clothing, any personal articles, 
signs, structures, vehicles, flyers, or any other materials. 
BPS will act to enforce this policy and to take appropriate action 
against any students, staff, administrators, or visitors who are 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 5 of 14 
 
 
 
found to have violated this policy. 
BPS staff and administrators will not solicit or accept any 
contributions, gifts, money, curricula, or materials from the 
electronic cigarette industry, tobacco industry, and tobacco or 
nicotine industry, or from any tobacco products shop. This 
includes, but is not limited to, donations, monies for scholarships, 
advertising, promotions, loans, or support for equipment, 
uniforms, and sports and/or training facilities. It shall also be a 
violation of this policy to participate in any type of service funded 
by any of the industries listed above. 
Exceptions/Exemptions: Tobacco and nicotine products, 
paraphernalia, devices, or imitation tobacco or nicotine products 
may be used for the following: 
1. Instructional or work-related activities in Boston Public 
Schools if the activity is conducted by a staff member or an 
approved visitor and the activity does not include smoking, 
vaping, chewing, or otherwise ingesting the product. 
2. Use by an adult (18 years and older) of a nicotine 
replacement product that has been approved by the US 
Food & Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco or nicotine 
cessation product, tobacco dependence product, or other 
medical purposes and is being marketed and sold solely for 
such an approved purpose.  
 
IIMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES 
A. Policy Owner: The Office of Health & Wellness (Policy 
Owner) is responsible for the review and update of the 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 6 of 14 
 
 
 
Tobacco Policy. The policy owner will provide policy 
communication and implementation support and guidance, 
including community resources for cessation and “Tobacco-
Free” signage. 
B. Central Office Administration: School superintendents and 
operational leaders are responsible for informing school 
principals and heads of school about the Tobacco Policy. 
[Central office leader] is responsible for informing all central 
office department heads, supervisors, and building 
administrators about the Tobacco Policy.  
C. Building Administrators (i.e., School Principals and 
Department Heads): It is the responsibility of building 
administrators to ensure compliance with the Tobacco 
Policy at all BPS schools and buildings: 
1. Supervise the implementation and enforcement of the 
policy at the school site. 
2. Ensure that “Tobacco-Free” signs in accordance with 
the Boston Public Health Commission are prominently 
posted throughout the school property. Locations 
must include all entrances/exits to buildings (including 
basement and loading docks), athletic fields, 
playgrounds, school buses/transportation vehicles, 
bathrooms, and teacher lounges. If signs are needed, 
please contact the Office of Health & Wellness. 
3. Ensure that no marketing or promotion of tobacco or 
nicotine products, tobacco brands, nicotine brands, or 
any tobacco or nicotine paraphernalia occurs on 
school property, at off-campus, school-sponsored 
events and extra-curricular activities, or within 50 feet 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 7 of 14 
 
 
 
of school property, including branding on gear, bags, 
clothing, any personal articles, signs, structures, 
vehicles, flyers, or any other materials. 
4. Ensure that any contributions, gifts, money, curricula, 
or materials from the electronic cigarette industry, 
tobacco industry, and tobacco or nicotine industry or 
from any tobacco products shop are neither solicited 
nor accepted. 
5. Inform all staff, students, parents, and visitors of their 
obligations with respect to the policy. 
a. This policy must appear in all student, family, and 
staff handbooks. 
b. Staff must sign that they have been informed of 
the policy. 
c. Inform students and employees how to 
anonymously report a violation to the Boston 
Public Health Commission: 617-534-4718. 
d. Communicate this policy to all visitors, which 
includes vendors and those contracted to do 
work, and those permitted to use the building and 
facilities before school, after school, and on the 
weekends. 
6. Make available information regarding tobacco 
smoking and nicotine cessation options for students, 
staff, and families. 
7. Consider appointing a designee to support the 
implementation and enforcement of this policy.  
D. Boston Public Health Commission (BPHC): The BPHC is 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 8 of 14 
 
 
 
responsible for the implementation of the Workplace 
Smoking Restrictions Regulation. The authority to enforce 
this regulation is held by the BPHC, its subsidiary programs 
or designees; the City of Boston Inspectional Services 
Department; the City of Boston Police Department; and the 
City of Boston Fire Department. Anyone may anonymously 
report a violation to the BPHC. As a result, a school or 
department may receive: 
1. In the case of a first violation a fine of two hundred 
dollars ($200.00). 
2. In the case of a second violation, within 24 months of 
the first violation, a fine of seven hundred dollars 
($700.00). 
3. In the case of three or more violations within 24 
months of the second or current violation, a fine of one 
thousand dollars ($1000.00) for each violation. 
E. School Principals and Heads of School: In accordance with 
the Comprehensive Health Education Policy (HWD-03), the 
school administration must ensure students are receiving 
the minimum health education course requirements and 
receiving substance use prevention education in line with 
BPS Health Education Frameworks and Student Learning 
Outcomes. 
 
F. BPS Staff: In accordance with state law and local regulation, 
all BPS staff are required to follow the Tobacco Policy. The 
success of this policy will depend upon the thoughtfulness, 
consideration, and cooperation of both tobacco or nicotine 
users and non-users. All individuals on school properties 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 9 of 14 
 
 
 
share in the responsibility to and enforcement of this policy.  
1. Do not use, consume, display, or sell any tobacco or 
nicotine products or any tobacco or nicotine 
paraphernalia at any time on school property, at off-
campus, school-sponsored events, and extracurricular 
activities, within vehicles located on school property, 
and within 50 feet of school property. Exemptions are 
made for only the following instances: 
a. Instructional or work-related activities in Boston 
Public Schools if the activity is conducted by a 
staff member or an approved visitor and the 
activity does not include smoking, vaping, 
chewing, or otherwise ingesting the product. 
b. Use by an adult (18 years and older) of a nicotine 
replacement product that has been approved by 
the US Food & Drug Administration for sale as a 
tobacco or nicotine cessation product, tobacco 
dependence product, or other medical purposes 
and is being marketed and sold solely for such an 
approved purpose. 
2. No marketing or promotion of tobacco or nicotine 
products, tobacco brands, nicotine brands, or any 
tobacco or nicotine paraphernalia occurs on school 
property, at off-campus, school-sponsored events and 
extra-curricular activities, or within 50 feet of school 
property, including branding on gear, bags, clothing, 
any personal articles, signs, structures, vehicles, flyers, 
or any other materials. 
3. Do not solicit or accept any contributions, gifts, money, 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 10 of 14 
 
 
 
curricula, or materials from the electronic cigarette 
industry, the tobacco industry, and tobacco or nicotine 
industry or from any tobacco products shop. 
4. Complaints regarding Tobacco Policy violations should 
be directed to building administrators who are 
responsible for following recommended disciplinary 
guidelines.  
5. Anonymous complaints may also be directed to 
Boston Public Health Commission (617-534-4718) 
where school departments and schools may be 
subject to a fine as listed above in section D. 
6. Consult the building administrator, school nurse, or 
the Boston Public Health Commission for information 
regarding tobacco smoking and nicotine cessation. 
7. Substance use prevention education to discourage the 
use of tobacco and nicotine products shall be included 
in comprehensive health education. Staff responsible 
for teaching tobacco and nicotine-use prevention 
must have adequate training and will participate in 
ongoing professional development activities to 
effectively deliver the education program as planned. 
G. School Nurses are responsible for working with the Health 
Services Department to provide local tobacco and nicotine-
use cessation resources at the school buildings.  
H. Central Office: Since youth substance use prevention and 
intervention must be a part of a multi-tiered approach, the 
following central office departments are responsible for 
supporting schools in these efforts: 
1. Office of Health and Wellness is responsible for 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 11 of 14 
 
 
 
providing training, instructional coaching, and 
instructional materials for substance use prevention 
education as a part of tier one comprehensive health 
education. Additionally, the office is responsible for 
maintaining health promotion materials and policy 
implementation support. 
2. The Health Services Department is responsible for 
communicating cessation resource information to 
school nurses and training on the referral process for 
cessation services.  
3. School Operations & Safety Division will communicate 
alternatives to suspension for students found in 
violation of the tobacco policy, including available 
workshops and other intervention programs. 
VIOLATIONS 
Enforcement of this policy will be by school principals/heads of 
school, building administrators, and department heads. Penalties 
for violation of the Smoke-Free Workplace Law will be enforced 
by school officials, the Boston Public Health Commission, and 
their agents. It is recommended that building administrators, 
principals, and supervisors implement disciplinary measures 
consistent with the progressive measures section of the BPS 
Code of Conduct: 
A. Students found in violation 
1. The first violation shall result in one or all of the 
following: 
a. Confiscation of tobacco or nicotine 
products/paraphernalia 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 12 of 14 
 
 
 
b. Notifying student’s family of the violation of policy 
and state law and recommend that families 
contact their primary care physician to discuss 
prevention and cessation interventions 
c. Meeting with appropriate school staff and the 
student’s family 
d. Providing student referrals to available cessation 
programs 
2. The second violation shall result in: 
a. Confiscation of tobacco or nicotine 
products/paraphernalia 
b. Notifying student’s family of the violation of policy 
and state law and recommend that families 
contact their primary care physician to discuss 
prevention and cessation interventions 
c. Providing student referrals to available cessation 
programs 
d. One or more of the following: 
i. Meeting with appropriate school staff and 
the student’s family 
ii. Participation in tobacco and nicotine 
education program 
3. The third violation shall result in: 
a. Confiscation of tobacco or nicotine 
products/paraphernalia 
b. Meeting with appropriate school staff and the 
student’s family 
c. Participation in tobacco or nicotine education 
program. Failure to participate in the education 
program may result in a suspension. 
d. One or more of the following: 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 13 of 14 
 
 
 
i. Community service  
ii. Suspension 
B. Staff found in violation 
1. Staff who are found to be in violation of this policy will 
be subject to discipline up to and including 
termination. 
2. Department heads and building administrators (such 
as principals) shall be responsible for any fines 
administered by the Boston Public Health Commission 
to the school or department, as outlined in section D. 
C. Visitors found in violation 
1. Visitors who are observed violating this policy shall be 
asked to comply with the Tobacco and Nicotine-Free 
Environment Policy. If the visitor fails to comply with 
the request, they will be referred to the building 
administrator or another district supervisory personnel 
available. The supervisor shall decide on further action 
that may include a directive to leave school property. 
2. Repeated violations may result in a recommendation 
to the school principal or building administrator to 
prohibit the individual from entering school district 
property for a specified time. If they refuse to leave, 
school police may be called to have the individual 
leave. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director of Health & 
Wellness 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 14 of 14 
 
 
 
Department: 
Health & Wellness 
Mailing Address: 
370 Columbia Rd., Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9698 
Email: 
healthandwellness@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HWD-01 
Version 01 
 
 
 
 
DISTRICT WELLNESS POLICY 
 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
BACKGROUND 
2 
I. POLICY 
5 
A. Wellness Councils 
6 
B. Cultural Proficiency 
13 
C. School Food and Nutrition Promotion 
16 
D. Comprehensive Physical Activity and Physical Education 20 
E. Comprehensive Health Education 
25 
F. Healthy School Environment 
26 
G. Safe and Supportive Schools 
28 
H. Health Services 
30 
I. Staff Wellness 
33 
II. IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES 
33 
A. District Wellness Council: 
33 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 2 of 102 
 
 
 
B. School-based Wellness Councils: 
34 
C. Implementation Guidelines for Monitoring and Evaluation 38 
III. DEFINITIONS 
86 
IV. INDEX OF FEDERAL, STATE, AND BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOL 
WELLNESS-RELATED  
POLICIES & GUIDELINES 
91 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
  
Understanding that physical and mental health, emotional well-
being, and positive development are inextricably linked with 
academic success, Boston Public Schools (BPS or the District) has 
worked to transform the District’s capacity to meet the health 
needs of Boston children. Improving overall student health is a 
key factor in reaching the ambitious academic targets set forth in 
the Superintendent’s Strategic Implementation Plan. Beyond the 
academic imperative however, school, civic and community 
leaders have a responsibility to help Boston’s children overcome 
health barriers that may prevent them from successfully meeting 
the challenges of reaching adulthood and assuming their roles as 
the eventual leaders and stewards of our community.  Our vision 
for the BPS graduate challenges us to develop young people who 
are more than scholars. It calls for graduates who are healthy in 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 3 of 102 
 
 
 
both mind and body, prepared to make wise choices to ensure 
their own physical, mental, and emotional well-being. 
  
To create a healthy school environment where the healthy choice 
is the easy choice, we have developed this policy regarding 
wellness initiatives in Boston Public Schools. This policy took 
effect September 1, 2017. 
  
First passed on June 30, 2006, the District Wellness Policy was 
implemented in September 2006.  It was updated in June 2013, 
and again in June 2017 taking into consideration the needs and 
perspectives expressed by members of the Boston School 
community, and responding to both the Healthy, Hunger-Free 
Kids Act1 and Massachusetts Standards for School Wellness 
Advisory Committees.2 This document is intended to assist 
administrators and Wellness Council members in implementing 
these guidelines in their schools. 
  
This District Wellness Policy reflects the comprehensive 
approach stated in the District’s Strategic Plan for Health and 
Wellness, Healthy Connections: Strengthening Coordination and 
 
1 P.L. 111–296—DEC. 13, 2010 
2 105 CMR 215 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 4 of 102 
 
 
 
Capacity in the Boston Public Schools to Advance Student 
Health and Wellness and brings together content areas 
recommended in the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention’s Whole School Whole Community Whole Child 
Approach. A subcommittee of the District Wellness Council 
formed into seven work groups, representing these topic areas: 
1. Cultural Proficiency 
2. School Food and Nutrition Promotion 
3. Comprehensive Physical Activity   
4. Comprehensive Health Education 
5. Healthy School Environment 
6. Health Services 
7. Safe and Supportive Schools 
8. Staff Wellness 
  
These work groups consulted the perspectives of the Boston 
School community as well as evidence-based national 
recommendations and wrote specific policy language and 
implementation guidelines that reference other relevant District 
policies and further develop policy language regarding wellness 
for all students. This comprehensive approach seeks to advance 
Boston Public Schools’ strategic aims to: improve coordination 
across programs and departments; improve and integrate data 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 5 of 102 
 
 
 
collection; establish guidelines for accountability appropriate to 
the group’s location within the organization; support building 
noncompeting partnerships internally and externally; and build 
sustainability.   
 
I. POLICY 
  
The Boston Public Schools (BPS or the District) aims to actively 
promote the social, emotional and physical health and wellness 
of all students to advance both their healthy development and 
readiness to learn. Student and staff wellness is a core value of 
the District and a key strategy to address health inequities and to 
close opportunity and achievement gaps that impact BPS 
students. Thus, BPS strives to be one of the healthiest school 
districts in the country. BPS will ensure that the healthy choice is 
the easy choice and that students learn the skills and knowledge 
needed to make those choices. BPS is committed to 
implementing a Whole School Whole Community Whole Child 
(WSCC) approach to wellness, as recommended by the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and ASCD (Association 
of Supervisors and Curriculum Development). As a part of this 
approach, BPS will meet the health and wellness needs of all 
students through prevention, intervention and intensive 
response. As a result, all BPS students will be challenged, 
supported, engaged, safe and healthy.                                                          
  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 6 of 102 
 
 
 
The District Wellness Policy is intended to link new and existing 
wellness-related policies and convey a framework for creating 
safe, healthy and welcoming school environments. BPS shall take 
a comprehensive approach to reviewing and incorporating 
changes in policy, curriculum, and operating procedures to 
promote healthy lifestyles and sustainable wellness practices for 
all students and staff. The work of implementing this policy relies 
on the work and collaboration of instructional, operational, 
clinical  
and administrative staff at schools and central office 
departments. BPS shall develop the capacity of schools to 
implement the policy and improve the quality and equity of 
programs, services, and supports. This policy is inclusive of all 
students, staff, and families. 
  
A. WELLNESS COUNCILS 
  
1.) District Wellness Council 
The BPS shall maintain a superintendent-appointed District 
Wellness Council. This advisory group will develop, recommend, 
review and advise on implementation of school District policies 
that address student and staff wellness. The District Wellness 
Policy shall be reviewed once yearly by the District Wellness 
Council and considered for updates based on other model school 
wellness policies and best practices, annual report findings and 
recommendations, input from schools and the community, 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 7 of 102 
 
 
 
research evidence, and regulations. The District Wellness Council 
shall seek ongoing feedback from BPS community stakeholders. 
Additionally, the District Wellness Council will develop an annual 
Wellness Action Plan with goals and SMART objectives for the 
coming school year.  
  
This council shall include at a minimum representatives from: 
families, students, school and District instructional and 
operational administrators, relevant central department heads, 
school food and nutrition services staff, physical education and 
health education teachers, school nurses and other school health 
professionals (e.g. psychologists, guidance counselors, social 
workers) a school committee member, community youth serving 
agencies, Boston Public Health Commission representatives, 
healthcare providers and the general public. Appointees to the 
maximum extent possible shall reflect the cultural, linguistic, and 
ethnic composition of BPS schools. General membership and 
attendance at the District Wellness Council is open to all 
stakeholders and the general public. The District Wellness 
Council will implement a plan for involving and engaging all of 
these stakeholders. 
  
2.) School-based Wellness Councils 
All BPS schools shall establish and maintain a school-based 
wellness council. School-based wellness councils shall act as a 
shared leadership team to implement wellness-related District 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 8 of 102 
 
 
 
policies. Councils must assess their school’s implementation of 
the Wellness Policy and create and implement an annual 
Wellness Action Plan as a part of the Quality School Plan. 
Principals shall name a wellness council chair(s) to coordinate the 
wellness council and act as a liaison to the District, community, 
and families. Wellness council chairs will attend District training. 
The council shall include at a minimum a school administrator, 
family representatives, students (where feasible), representatives 
of a wide range of school health and health-related disciplines, 
including school nurses, school food service staff, health 
education and physical education teachers and other school 
health professionals, such as psychologists, guidance counselors, 
and social workers. To the extent feasible, members will include 
operations and custodial staff, community partners and the 
general public.  Appointees to the maximum extent possible shall 
reflect the cultural, linguistic and ethnic composition of the 
school community.     
 
  
3.) Stakeholder Participation in Councils / Informing and 
Updating the Public 
The District will develop a district-level communication strategy 
and communication guidance for schools to increase awareness 
of the policy and its importance for creating a safe, healthy, and 
welcoming school. a.  The following are responsibilities for 
informing stakeholders about policy: 
1. BPS will post the District Wellness Policy on the BPS 
website. 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 9 of 102 
 
 
 
2. Schools must share a link to the District Wellness Policy on 
their school’s website and send a message to families 
notifying them of how they may obtain a copy or otherwise 
access the policy. 
3. School-based Wellness Councils shall annually 
communicate wellness-related policies so that all staff, 
families and students are aware of the policy requirements. 
4. BPS and schools shall notify families and the public about 
the content of the District Wellness Policy and any updates 
to the policy on an annual basis. 
5. BPS will ensure that the District Wellness Policy and any 
public announcement related to the policy are available in 
the languages that represent the school community. 
  
b.  The following are responsibilities for informing stakeholders 
about the District Wellness Council and school-based councils: 
1. BPS will make available to the public and school 
community, on the BPS website and through other regular 
channels of communication that BPS utilizes, a list of names 
and position titles (or relationship to the school) of 
individuals who are a part of the District Wellness Council, 
including the name, position title, and school- based contact 
information of the council leadership and subcommittee co-
chairs. 
2. BPS will post the District Wellness Action Plan on the BPS 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 10 of 102 
 
 
 
website to share District goals and objectives for the school 
year. 
3. Schools must make available to the public and school 
community on their website a list of names and position 
titles (or relationship to the school) of individuals who are a 
part of their school-based wellness councils and include the 
name, position title, and school-based contact information 
of the council chairs(s). 
4. Schools must post their Wellness Action Plans on their 
school’s website to share local school goals and activities to 
implement the policy. 
5. BPS shall make available to the public and the schools the 
results of the annual assessment, which is detailed in the 
next section, and actively notify families of the availability of 
the assessment results. 
  
c. The following are responsibilities for engaging stakeholders: 
1. The District Wellness Council and school-based councils will 
encourage diverse membership on councils and 
subcommittees, attendance at meetings, and participation 
of all BPS stakeholders through public comment and 
feedback. 
2. BPS will share information on the District website about 
how the public can get involved with the District and 
school-based wellness councils. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 11 of 102 
 
 
 
3. Schools must share information on their school’s website 
about how the public can get involved with the school 
wellness councils. 
4. BPS will develop methods to educate students about 
wellness policies and ways they can be involved in the 
wellness councils when developmentally appropriate. 
                                                                                                                     
 
4.) Monitoring, Assessment and Reporting 
BPS shall develop and implement an evaluation plan designed to 
measure school-level implementation and student level 
outcomes of all policy components of the District Wellness Policy. 
Where possible the metrics will align with other District 
indicators and be measurable using existing evaluation tools and 
systems and be sustainable over time. This plan will be made 
available to the public as a part of the District Wellness Policy 
circular. 
  
BPS shall annually assess compliance with the District Wellness 
Policy, alternating between qualitative and quantitative annual 
assessments. The annual assessment will measure the extent to 
which schools are in compliance with the BPS policy and the 
progress made in attaining the goals of the previous year’s 
Wellness Action Plan. The District Wellness Council will write an 
annual report that will include: the results of assessment, the 
extent to which the Boston Public School District Wellness Policy 
compares to model local school wellness policies, a summary of 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 12 of 102 
 
 
 
the District activities and accomplishments related to wellness 
policy implementation of the previous year, and goals and 
objectives for the upcoming year. This annual report shall be 
presented to the superintendent, the School Committee and the 
Massachusetts Department of Education. The District will 
develop a strategy for reporting on compliance of each school. 
  
BPS shall maintain records to document compliance with 
Wellness Policy including: the written District Wellness Policy; 
documentation demonstrating compliance with community 
involvement requirements; documentation of the annual 
assessment of the District Wellness Policy; and documentation to 
demonstrate compliance with the annual public notification 
requirements. 
  
5.) Wellness Policy Leadership 
School principals are responsible for ensuring their school 
complies with the Wellness Policy. At the District level, the 
executive director of the Office of Health and Wellness is 
responsible for overseeing monitoring, reporting, and 
communication of the BPS Wellness Policy. The following District 
departments are responsible for supporting implementation and 
monitoring of specific components of the policy: 
a. Behavioral Health Services 
b. Facilities & Capital Management 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 13 of 102 
 
 
 
c. Food and Nutrition Services 
d. Health and Wellness 
e. Health Services 
f. Office of Engagement 
g. Office of Equity 
h. Office of Opportunity Gaps 
i. Safe and Welcoming Schools 
j. Transportation 
  
The compiled department information will be reported to 
instructional superintendents and operational superintendents 
who are granted the authority and responsibility by the 
superintendent to ensure each school complies with the policy. 
BPS will provide a means of contacting the District or school 
official(s) responsible for oversight by designating District or 
school-based phone(s) number and/or email address for this 
purpose. 
  
B. CULTURAL PROFICIENCY 
             
 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to creating a culturally 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 14 of 102 
 
 
 
proficient District that embraces at its fundamental core the 
culturally sustaining and affirming beliefs and practices that 
honor differences while mitigating the effects of concentrated 
poverty and institutional racism in the effort to eliminate gaps 
and promote health and wellness for all. The District is 
committed to providing authentic learning opportunities for 
every child in every classroom in every school to ensure they 
develop into healthy, engaged, self-determined, and 
independent learners that are college and career ready. The 
District recognizes that Culturally and Linguistically Sustaining 
Practices (CLSP) helps to create a safe, healthy and welcoming 
environment that supports all students’ social, emotional, 
physical and academic learning as well as their health and 
wellness. Cultural Proficiency is an approach that raises 
awareness of individual and institutional culture and bias, 
encourages cultural learning and relationship building, and 
implements CLSP, to respect, celebrate and build on cultural 
strengths and diversity. Cultural diversity includes but is not 
limited to group and/or individual identities based on race, 
ethnicity, nationality, immigration status, religion, language, 
gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, ability, social class, 
and home life or family structure. Cultural Proficiency should be 
integrated into the implementation of other areas of the District 
Wellness Policy and is called out here to establish specific actions 
to be taken by the District and the schools. 
  
The District will support the development of staff and 
administrators’ competencies to build cultural proficiency in 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 15 of 102 
 
 
 
schools, classrooms and central office departments. Schools shall 
collectively assess their organizational structure, policies and 
school-wide practices for bias(es) as well as examine their 
physical environment, classroom curricula, instructional materials 
and wellness promotions. Schools will use this assessment to 
inform their annual Wellness Action Plan. The District and the 
schools shall include student, family and community 
participation in decision-making bodies and create structures for 
feedback from students, families and communities and increased 
engagement of all families in wellness-related policies and 
committees. This includes recognizing specific barriers faced by 
families of ELL students and ELL students with disabilities by 
targeting outreach to these groups and using the Translation and 
Interpretation Unit to translate family-focused communications 
and to provide interpretation as requested during meetings. 
  
Schools will follow other cultural proficiency-related policies, 
including those regarding race, ethnicity, immigration status, 
religion, language, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, 
and disabilities and policies that promote family and student 
engagement. The work of creating a culturally proficient District 
requires the participation of departments and staff across the 
District and requires engagement in interdepartmental 
collaboration. 
  
  


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 16 of 102 
 
 
 
C. SCHOOL FOOD AND NUTRITION PROMOTION 
  
The Boston Public Schools supports lifelong healthy eating habits 
for all students and staff and is committed to addressing the 
increasing rates of diet-related health consequences among 
these groups by creating a healthy school food environment.  
Serving healthy choices in the lunchroom, limiting availability 
and marketing of unhealthful foods and sugary drinks, and 
making water available to students throughout the day are some 
of the ways to create a healthy school food environment. BPS is 
committed to ensuring food sold or served outside of the 
cafeteria meets high nutritional standards. 
  
Boston Public Schools believes the cafeteria is an essential 
setting to educate and promote healthy eating habits. Boston 
Public Schools is committed to serving students nutritious and 
delicious food that is less processed, more locally sourced, and 
culturally responsive to reflect the diverse student population. As 
an effective way to improve the nutritional quality of both foods 
served in schools and consumed by students, BPS will create and 
implement School Meals Nutrition Standards, going beyond 
federal requirements. BPS shall undertake a constant review of 
school food and the food environment to ensure safety, quality, 
menu equity, and innovation. Boston Public Schools shall be an 
innovator with school food, serving foods that are new and 
exciting for the students. We believe that students deserve meals 
reflective of their culture and tastes. We believe eating well is not 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 17 of 102 
 
 
 
a privilege; it is a right. Therefore, BPS is committed to ensuring 
all students are food secure. 
  
Key requirements of creating a healthy school food environment 
are: 
  
1.) School Meals Program 
a. Ensure all menus meet USDA-mandated requirements, as 
well as Massachusetts Department of Public Health 
regulations and the latest scientific evidence on healthy 
eating practices. At a minimum, schools must follow Bronze 
status standards for the Alliance for a Healthier Generation, 
and work toward Bronze status standards for the Healthier 
US School Challenge. 
b. Ensure all menus offer variety and are well presented in an 
appealing way, and meals and menu items are labeled to 
communicate deliciousness, as well as specific ingredients. 
c. Encourage students to participate in breakfast, lunch, and 
afterschool meals programs and avoid stigmatizing children 
who participate. 
d. Provide foods that are free of unwanted ingredients 
including, trans fats, high fructose corn syrup, artificial 
colors, artificial sweeteners, additives (azodicarbonamide, 
bromated flour), and artificial preservatives (nitrates, nitrites, 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 18 of 102 
 
 
 
sulfates, sulfites, MSG, BHA, BHT, TBHQ). Menus follow the 
BPS Menu and Ingredient Guidelines. The guidelines are 
updated annually. 
e. Reduce material used for packaging, sourcing recyclable or 
compostable materials when possible and working to 
promote best practices around recycling and composting. 
f. Water must be available at no cost during mealtimes 
wherever meals are served. 
  
2.) Food Safety 
a. Ensure kitchen facilities (both prep and satellite locations) 
are inspected twice a year by the Inspectional Services 
Division (ISD - Health Department). 
b. Implement a stringent and detailed internal Hazard Analysis 
and Control Points (HACCP) plan that provides regulations 
in following safety procedures for food recalls, emergency 
preparedness to avoid foodborne illnesses, and the spread 
of infectious diseases. 
c. Ensure all employees who work 5+ hours are certified in 
food safety. 
d. Ensure all lead employees are allergy awareness certified 
and have American Heart Association HeartSaver First Aid 
Program 2-year certification. 
  


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 19 of 102 
 
 
 
3.) Nutrition Education, Promotion and Food & Beverage 
Marketing 
a. Promote health and nutrition messages that encourage the 
consumption of fruits and vegetables, whole grains, healthy 
fats, low-fat dairy products, and water and other messages 
consistent with research-based findings that indicate a 
positive impact on health. 
b. Identify opportunities to teach healthy eating habits in 
health education, physical education, and other subjects, 
and through cafeteria and other school-wide promotions. 
c. Identify opportunities to support teachers, school staff, and 
parents around modeling healthy eating habits and 
following appropriate nutritional standards at school 
celebrations and staff meetings. 
d. Allow only food and beverage marketing on school grounds, 
including items shared with students, that promote foods 
and/or beverages that meet the BPS nutritional standards. 
  
4.) Competitive Food & Beverages 
a. All schools shall follow federal, state, and local laws and 
regulations for competitive foods and beverages (i.e. foods 
sold, provided, or served within school buildings or on 
school grounds outside of the school meals program) as 
outlined in this circular.  


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 20 of 102 
 
 
 
b. Prohibit food sold in competition with school meals, 
including food-based fundraisers and vending machines 
during the school day.   
c. The Food and Nutrition Services Department is solely 
responsible for food and beverages sold to children during 
the school day; consequently, the sale of food and beverages 
by others is expressly forbidden. 
d. Encourage non-food alternatives for school fundraisers, 
school parties, and classroom celebrations.  
e. Prohibit the use of food and beverage as a reward or means 
of discipline.  
  
All Boston Public Schools shall follow Food and Nutrition Services 
policies and circulars. 
  
D. COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND PHYSICAL 
EDUCATION 
  
The Boston Public Schools is committed to a District-wide, 
strategic effort to increase all students’ physical activity and 
fitness by bringing more physical education and physical activity 
to schools; improving the quality of physical education and 
recess; and increasing the equity of physical activity programs 
and resources across our schools. Activities will be inclusive to 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 21 of 102 
 
 
 
meet the needs, interests, abilities and cultural diversity of all 
students, including students of all gender identities, students 
with disabilities, and students with special healthcare needs. 
  
Numerous studies indicate that regularly engaging in moderate-
to-vigorous exercise contributes to overall physical and mental 
health and that nurturing an exercise habit among children lays 
the foundation for lifelong fitness. Research also shows that 
increased physical activity increases children’s cognitive function, 
ability to concentrate in class, and academic performance.  Thus, 
as a part of a strategic effort to improve academic performance, 
BPS recognizes and promotes the benefits of a Comprehensive 
Physical Activity Program, where quality physical education is the 
cornerstone and additional physical activity is integrated 
throughout the school day and into before and after school 
programs, staff wellness and family engagement activities. 
  
The Boston Public Schools is committed to a strong athletics 
program that offers a variety of programs and is accessible to all 
students. Athletics participation can contribute to student fitness, 
wellness, character development and a lifelong commitment to a 
physically active lifestyle. Additionally, by establishing a safe, 
supportive and engaging school environment, athletic programs 
encourage school connectedness and create a climate where 
healthy competition and support fill the school with spirit and a 
sense of community. Research shows that healthy children are 
better learners and connected students are more likely to stay in 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 22 of 102 
 
 
 
school. In this way, athletics contributes to the academic success 
of students. 
  
In accordance with state law, all schools must provide all 
students in all grades with opportunities for physical activity. 
Schools must offer at least 150 minutes of in-school physical 
activity weekly in grades PreK-8, including required physical 
education, movement breaks, recess, or lessons involving 
movement structured to support moderate-to-vigorous physical 
activity (MVPA).  In grades PreK-8, students are expected to have 
at least 20 minutes of daily recess.  
  
Teachers and other school and community personnel shall not 
use physical activity (e.g., running laps, pushups) as punishment 
nor withhold opportunities for physical activity during the school 
day (including but not limited to recess, classroom physical 
activity breaks, or physical education) as punishment for any 
reason other than illness or safety or as approved by the school 
leader. This includes denying a student physical activity time in 
order to make up work unless under unusual circumstances. The 
district will provide teachers and other school staff with a list of 
ideas for alternative ways to discipline students. 
 
All schools must offer standards-based physical education (PE) 
for all students in all grades.  Schools are required to offer at least 
45 minutes of weekly PE in grades PreK-8 and at least one 


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 23 of 102 
 
 
 
semester (equivalent of a half school year) of PE each year in 
grades 9-12.  We recommend that schools provide at least 80 
minutes of weekly PE in grades PreK-8.  In order to help schools 
work toward this recommendation, Boston Public Schools will 
develop an implementation plan with input from current 
principals and headmasters. This implementation plan will be 
shared with the School Committee. 
 
Teachers and other school and community personnel shall not 
use physical activity (e.g., running laps, pushups) as punishment; 
withhold opportunities for physical activity during the school day 
(including but not limited to recess, classroom physical activity 
breaks or physical education) as punishment for any reason; or 
deny a student physical activity time in order to make up work 
unless under unusual circumstances. 
  
Extended day programs and out of school time, which includes 
before and after school programs, are expected to offer an array 
of physical activity opportunities to ensure all students are able to 
participate. Schools shall offer opportunities for students to 
participate in physical activity before and after the school day, 
including extended day time, through a variety of methods 
including physical activity clubs, physical activity in before/after 
school programs, intramurals and interscholastic sports, and in 
their school commute.  
  


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 24 of 102 
 
 
 
The District recognizes that students benefit from bicycle and 
pedestrian safety education to help make the trip to and from 
school safer and instill confidence in students, parents and 
community members. The District will develop and maintain 
policies and procedures for working together with city agencies, 
schools, families, and students in efforts to promote a safer and 
easier trip to and from school when students and staff are 
walking, bicycling, using public transit or other means of 
physically active transport. The District will encourage 7-12th 
grade students to use public transportation when available and 
appropriate for travel to school, and will work with the local 
transit agency to provide transit passes for eligible 7-12th grade 
students. The District will provide resources to schools, students 
and families regarding walking, riding a bicycle, using public 
transit or other forms of active transportation.  The District will 
encourage wellness councils, school administrators and students, 
staff, families and community partners to assist the District in 
promoting safe, physically active travel to and from school. 
Schools are encouraged to designate a transportation liaison to 
facilitate communication regarding District efforts to promote 
safe, physically active travel to and from school. Schools shall 
participate in student transportation surveys when requested to 
help the District plan for strategies to promote a safer and easier 
trip to and from school when walking, bicycling, using public 
transit or other means of physically active transport. 
 


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 25 of 102 
 
 
 
E. COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH EDUCATION 
  
The Boston Public Schools require comprehensive Pre-K through 
grade 12 health education that is medically accurate, age and 
developmentally appropriate, culturally and linguistically 
sustaining, and implemented in a safe and supportive learning 
environment where all students feel valued. All Boston Public 
Schools must take a skills-based approach to teach 
comprehensive health education that addresses a variety of 
topics, such as tobacco, alcohol, and substance misuse and harm 
reducation, nutritional health, mental and emotional health, 
personal health and wellness, physical activity, safety and injury 
prevention, violence prevention, and comprehensive sexual 
health education that is LGBTQ+ affirming.  
 
Comprehensive health education curriculum shall be modified as 
needed for students with disabilities and students who are 
English learners. It shall promote healthy lifestyle habits, healthy 
relationships and health literacy for all students. Health 
education curricula will align with the BPS Health Education 
Frameworks, which integrate the Massachusetts Comprehensive 
Health Curriculum Framework and National Health Education 
Standards, as well as the National Sexuality Education Standards. 
Qualified and trained teachers will implement the curricula. 
 
All schools will follow relevant promotion and graduation 


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 26 of 102 
 
 
 
requirements that include: Health education that includes at 
minimum the Healthy and Safe Body Unit in elementary school; 
two semesters of health education in grades 6 to 8 taught by a 
licensed health education teacher; and a one semester course of 
health education in total in grades 9 to 12 taught by a licensed 
health education teacher. In addition to these course 
requirements, health education topics will be integrated into 
other subject areas where possible, so as to reinforce their 
importance, provide additional skill practice, and demonstrate 
the connections of health concepts to many other content areas. 
  
F. HEALTHY SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT 
  
The Boston Public Schools recognizes that healthy physical 
environments are critical to the prevention of asthma and other 
chronic and infectious diseases that impact learning. The Boston 
Public Schools is committed to providing high-performing school 
buildings and grounds that are clean, in good repair, have 
healthy indoor air quality and water quality, sanitary and 
accessible bathrooms, and use resources efficiently. BPS strives 
to provide adequate facilities for physical activity that are 
accessible and culturally inclusive learning environments that 
positively impact productivity, health, and wellness of all students 
and staff. To address environmental risk factors for chronic and 
infectious disease, each school will receive an Annual 
Environmental Audit to evaluate health and safety conditions 
such as leaks, mold, pests, chemical storage and cleanliness. The 


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 27 of 102 
 
 
 
District shall maintain a Healthy Schools Taskforce (HST) to 
promote and raise awareness of the health of the built 
environment and ensure continuous improvement of BPS 
healthy school environment policies and programs.  
  
District departments and all schools, through an Environmental 
Committee or school-based Wellness Council, shall comply with 
existing federal and state regulations, city ordinances and District 
policies related to promoting and managing healthy school 
environments, including but not limited to: 
○ Green Cleaners 
○ Integrated Pest Management 
○ Trash and Recycling 
○ Infection Prevention & Control 
○ Tobacco Free Environmental Policy 
○ Environmental Inspection/Audit 
○ Student Safety/Health in School Shops 
○ BPS Water Policy 
○ Laboratories and Chemical Inventory “Right to Know” Law 
○ Idling of buses and other motor vehicles on school property 
  


Page 28:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 28 of 102 
 
 
 
Schools shall regularly assess the quality and quantity of BPS 
facilities for active transportation, physical activity, and physical 
education, including schoolyards, and report maintenance needs 
for these facilities. 
 
G. SAFE AND SUPPORTIVE SCHOOLS 
  
The Boston Public Schools shall create a safe and supportive 
school environment for all students that is culturally proficient, 
engaging, and inclusive and one that provides skills-based 
education to promote healthy relationships and development 
and provides access to support services. Prevention, promotion 
and intervention-based work will address and integrate social 
emotional health and behavioral health. BPS will continue to 
foster a variety of integrated community partnerships to 
maximize support to students, families and schools. Partnerships 
in this area include allied city and state agencies, universities, 
hospitals and other community-based organizations. Schools will 
better meet the needs of students by creating safe and inclusive 
climates that are responsive to all forms of bullying and violence, 
including bias-based conduct, suicide, intimate partner violence, 
and sexual harassment and assault, and using screening and 
promotion efforts, including mental health and substance use 
screening.  Special attention will be given to vulnerable student 
populations, including but not limited to LGBTQ students, 
refugee, asylee, documented and undocumented immigrant 
students, ELL students and ELL students with disabilities, 


Page 29:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 29 of 102 
 
 
 
expectant and parenting students, court-involved students, 
students experiencing homelessness, and students experiencing 
trauma. These efforts will create a safe and supportive learning 
environment that optimizes academic outcomes for all students. 
Implementation of these efforts requires school psychologists, 
social workers, guidance counselors, school nurses, community 
partners and trained classroom teachers working together on an 
effective student support team. Boston Public Schools shall 
develop and implement a plan for K-12 SEL standards. 
  
Boston Public Schools shall put in place systems that align to the 
district-accepted Multi-tiered System of Supports (MTSS) 
framework to ensure that all students have access to key 
resources and services in a safe and supportive environment. 
Schools shall adopt a MTSS Framework to support the 
development of a continuum of behavioral health supports and 
interventions falling across three tiers: Tier 1: Prevention and 
promotion, Tier 2: At-risk interventions and services and Tier 3: 
Intensive interventions and services.  Embedded into MTSS is the 
use of positive behavioral interventions and supports and social 
emotional learning instruction designed to create safe and 
supportive school climates and build the skills of staff and 
students.  The Comprehensive Behavioral Health Model (CBHM) 
is an example of an evidence-based MTSS-Behavioral framework 
designed to meet the behavioral health needs of students and 
includes evidence-based practices interventions and data to 
determine effectiveness. CBHM is used in many BPS schools and 
will be made available to all schools. CBHM has been proven to 


Page 30:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 30 of 102 
 
 
 
promote positive behavioral health and reduce barriers to 
learning for students in participating schools. MTSS framework, 
including CBHM, incorporates the following key elements: 
○ Assessment including universal behavioral health screening 
○ Instruction including social emotional learning curriculum 
and delivery of services 
○ Data based decision making 
○ Building staff leadership and capacity 
○ Effective District and school structures and procedures (e.g. 
student support teams) 
  
In addition, schools shall follow all BPS policies that address 
specific areas of school safety and climate including the Code of 
Conduct and other related policies such as those related to crisis 
management, expectant and parenting students, sexual 
harassment, discrimination, and assault. 
  
H. HEALTH SERVICES 
  
The Boston Public School Health Services support students to be 
healthy, engaged, safe, and academically challenged by 
providing high quality, cost-effective in-school health care. BPS 
nurses are responsible for evaluating and managing the health 


Page 31:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 31 of 102 
 
 
 
needs of all students. That includes the following: 
○ Case management students with special health needs, 
including chronic or acute illnesses 
○ Monitoring and administering medications and medical 
procedures as prescribed by a student’s primary care 
provider or medical specialist 
○ Providing first aid and emergency care 
○ Screening students for height, weight, Body Mass Index, 
vision, hearing, scoliosis, substance use (screening, brief 
intervention and referral to treatment) 
○ Managing student medical records and immunization 
records 
○ Managing the control of communicable diseases 
○ Coordinating medical transportation for students 
○ Coordinating special dietary accommodations for students 
with food allergies 
○ Working with other school-based groups to provide safe 
and healthy environments 
  
In addition, school nurses engage in one-on-one education, small 
group health counseling, wellness promotion, and preventive 
services as part of the provision of care coordination services. BPS 
school nurses ensure access and/or referrals to the medical home 


Page 32:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 32 of 102 
 
 
 
or private health care provider. Where lawful, Boston Public 
Schools encourages positive communication and involvement 
with family regarding health services. Health Services actively 
collaborates with school and community support services to 
increase the ability of students and families to adapt to health 
and social stressors, such as chronic health conditions, adverse 
childhood experiences (ACE) and other social, emotional and 
economic determinants of health. BPS Health Services is 
committed to building partnerships with city agencies, medical 
providers, and community partners to leverage additional 
resources and health services. 
  
Under Massachusetts Adolescent Confidentiality laws, adolescent 
students may receive confidential services for diagnosis, 
treatment and/or referral for drug addiction, family planning 
services, sexually transmitted diseases, and mental health. In 
accordance with the BPS Condom Accessibility Circular, BPS 
High Schools shall provide access to condoms, with appropriate 
reproductive health counseling for students. Each high school 
will have a Condom Accessibility Team (CAT) which will consist of 
a minimum of at least three school staff members. Condoms will 
be made available through the CAT at each school. Condoms will 
also be accessible from community health service partners and 
the Boston Public Health Commission (BPHC). Parents and legal 
guardians may exempt their children from receiving condoms by 
notifying the school when they complete the family information 
forms at the beginning of the school year. This exemption to not 
receive condoms does not apply to other confidential health 


Page 33:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 33 of 102 
 
 
 
services.  
  
I. STAFF WELLNESS 
  
The Boston Public Schools cares about the well-being of staff 
members and understands the influence that staff actions have 
on all student health behaviors. All staff shall promote a school 
environment supportive of healthy behaviors. Adults are 
encouraged to model healthy behaviors, especially on school 
property and at school-sponsored meetings and events. Schools 
are encouraged to support staff wellness initiatives. 
 
 
II. IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES 
  
The following guidelines will ensure the implementation of the 
Boston Public Schools Wellness Policy: 
  
A. DISTRICT WELLNESS COUNCIL: 
 
The superintendent will appoint members to serve on the District 


Page 34:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 34 of 102 
 
 
 
Wellness Council. The council will: 
  
a. Follow bylaws that are aligned with Massachusetts 
Standards for School Wellness Advisory Committees.3 
b. Annually review, and if needed recommend, District-wide 
policies to promote student wellness 
c. Annually set Council goals and objectives 
d. Annually report progress on Council goals, objectives, 
policies, and monitoring & evaluation of Wellness Policy 
implementation 
  
B. SCHOOL-BASED WELLNESS COUNCILS: 
  
Schools will establish and maintain a school-based wellness 
council. Principals shall name a wellness council chair(s) to 
coordinate the wellness council and act as a liaison to the District, 
community, and families. Wellness council chairs will attend 
District training. School-based Wellness Councils on an annual 
basis shall: 
 
3 M.G.L. 105 CMR 215  


Page 35:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 35 of 102 
 
 
 
  
a. Convene at least 4 times per school year. 
b. The council shall include at a minimum a school 
administrator, family representatives, students (where 
feasible), representatives of a wide range of school health 
and health-related disciplines, including school nurses, 
school food service staff, health education and physical 
education teachers and other school health professionals, 
such as psychologists, guidance counselors, and social 
workers. To the extent feasible, members will include 
operations and custodial staff, community partners and the 
general public.  Appointees to the maximum extent possible 
shall reflect the cultural, linguistic and ethnic composition of 
the school community 
c. Implement District-level policies related to wellness. School 
Wellness Councils will annually review District policies 
related to wellness. If applicable, the school wellness council 
will apply strategies to implement these policies. See the 
Index of Federal, State, and Boston Public School wellness-
related Policies & Guidelines section on page 17. 
d. Assess the school’s wellness status. Schools will use the 
following surveys and audits to assess the wellness status of 
school: 
○ Healthy Schools Program Inventory, Alliance for a 
Healthier Generation. 
○ Environmental Health Inspection Audit 


Page 36:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 36 of 102 
 
 
 
○ School Health Profiles, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention 
○ District data, such as the Youth Risk Behavior Survey 
○ Other District priorities 
The Health and Wellness Department will determine on an 
annual basis the exact timeline and process for completing 
these assessments. 
e. Create and Implement a Wellness Action Plan. Schools will 
complete a BPS Wellness Action Plan template and include 
a link to their plan in the Wellness section of their Quality 
School Plan (QSP) by Fall due date. The Wellness Council 
coordinator(s) name and contact information should also be 
included on the QSP. Principals are ultimately responsible 
for the implementation of the Wellness Action Plan. The 
Health and Wellness Department, in collaboration with the 
instructional and operational superintendents will 
determine on an annual basis the exact timeline and 
process. The school will complete this Plan as a Quality 
School Plan, or other academic improvement plans. 
Wellness Action Plans must include goals and school-based 
activities designed to promote student wellness based on 
the results of the school’s Healthy Schools Program 
Inventory, Environmental Health Inspection/Audit, annual 
District priorities, and other appropriate assessment tools. A 
Roster of each school’s Wellness Council will be submitted 
as a part of the Wellness Action Plan template.  Instructions 
and a template for the Wellness Action Plan can be found 


Page 37:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 37 of 102 
 
 
 
online at: http://www.bostonpublicschools.org/hwd 
f. Engaging stakeholders: 
○ Schools must make available to the public and school 
community on their website a list of names and 
position titles (or relationship to the school) of 
individuals who are a part of their school-based 
wellness councils and include the name, position title, 
and school-based contact information of the council 
chairs(s). 
○ Schools must share information on their school’s 
website about how the public can get involved with 
the school wellness councils. 
○ Schools must post their Wellness Action Plans on their 
school’s website to share local school goals and 
activities to implement the policy. 
○ Schools must share a link to the District Wellness 
Policy on their school’s website and send a message to 
families notifying them of how they may obtain a copy 
or otherwise access the policy. 
○ School-based Wellness Councils shall annually 
communicate wellness-related policies so that all staff, 
families and students are aware of the policy 
requirements. 
  


Page 38:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 38 of 102 
 
 
 
Associated Boston Public Schools District departments will 
provide professional development, toolkits, resources, and 
technical assistance to support the implementation of District-
level policies related to wellness. Schools will be able to access 
professional development using the District-supported My 
Learning Plan. Wellness related trainings will be culturally 
proficient by addressing race, ethnicity, and nationality; sexual 
orientation and gender identity; special needs; language and 
dialect; and practical skills in mediating intercultural conflict. 
                                                                                                                           
C. IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES FOR MONITORING AND 
EVALUATION 
  
The Boston Public Schools Health and Wellness Department, in 
collaboration with appropriate District Departments, will be 
designated to ensure that each school, including out of school 
time programs, complies with this policy. Other wellness-related 
policies will be monitored, evaluated, and supported by the 
District departments that currently oversee these policies. The 
District will collect additional data than listed in this section to 
monitor compliance. 
  
To evaluate the effectiveness of policy implementation, the BPS 
Health and Wellness Department and appropriate District 
departments will facilitate school-based surveys and audits 
measuring changes in school environments over time.  Such 


Page 39:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 39 of 102 
 
 
 
surveys include: 
a. Healthy Schools Program Assessment, Alliance for a 
Healthier Generation. 
b. School Health Profiles, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention 
○ Principal Survey (all school levels) 
○ Lead Health Ed. Teacher Survey (schools with grades 6-
12) 
○ Lead Phys. Ed. Teacher Survey (all school levels) 
c. District staffing reports from the Office of Human Capital 
d. Essential School Health Services Monthly Activities Report 
e. School Environmental Audit 
  
To evaluate the effectiveness of policy implementation, the BPS 
Health and Wellness Department and appropriate District 
departments will facilitate anonymous student surveys 
measuring changes in student outcomes over time. Where 
possible, data must be reported by vulnerable subgroups (e.g. 
race/ethnicity, gender, sexual identity) Such surveys include, but 
are not limited to: 
a. Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS): 
○ Middle School YRBS (conducted biennially in 


Page 40:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 40 of 102 
 
 
 
randomized sample of schools serving students in 
grades 6-8 during the Fall semester of even numbered 
school years, i.e., Fall 2013, 2015, 2017, etc.). 
○ High School YRBS (conducted biennially in randomized 
sample of schools serving students in grades 9-12 
during the Spring semester of odd numbered school 
years, i.e., Spring 2015, 2017, 2019, etc.) 
b. School Climate Survey (conducted annually by the Office of 
Data & Accountability) 
c. FITNESSGRAM (grades 3-12) 
d. Health Services SNAPNurse system 
  
As stated above, the annual report shall be presented to the 
DWC, superintendent, the School Committee, and the 
Massachusetts Department of Education, and shared with BPS 
stakeholders. 
 
District Wellness Policy Monitoring & Evaluation Plan 
 
Table Abbreviations:  
PO = Process Outcome; IMO = Intermediate Outcome; LTO = 


Page 41:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 41 of 102 
 
 
 
Long-term Outcomes 
General Policy/Council (GEN) Metrics 
GEN Process Outcomes (PO) 


Page 42:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 42 of 102 
 
 
 
PO1: DWC and Subcommittee Meetings [DWC Records] 
PO1.1: # of Meetings (DWC & by subcommittee) 
PO1.2: # of attendees 
PO1.3: Action Plan completion (yes/no) 
PO1.4: Review Policy (yes/no) 
PO1.5: Hear Stakeholder Feedback through public comment 
(yes/no) 
PO1.6: Update policy (yes/no/not applicable) 
PO2: Policy Communication/Public Notification (yes/no) 
[DWC Records] 
PO2.1: Policy Translation 
PO2.2: Post to BPS website: Policy, meeting times, action 
plan, membership, contact information 
PO2.3: Policy in Parent Guidebook 
PO2.4: Policy update presentations to School Committee 
PO2.5: Policy update presentations to: BSAC, CPC, DELAC, 
SPEDPAC 
PO3: Policy Evaluation [DWC Records/Profiles] 
PO3.1: Evaluation Plan (in place) 


Page 43:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 43 of 102 
 
 
 
PO3.2: Annual Report (yes/no) 
PO3.2.1: Alternating Qualitative & Quantitative Reports 
PO3.2.2: Post to website 
PO3.2.3: Share with Superintendent, School Committee, 
DESE 
PO3.2.4: Sent to parent councils 
PO3.3: Biennial School Wellness Reports [Profiles] 
PO4: Policy Trainings 
PO4.1: PDs for school wellness council and teachers [HWD 
Records] 
PO4.2: Training materials for Principals, Superintendents, 
Central Office Leaders 
PO5: School-based Wellness Councils 
PO5.1: % of schools submitting WAPs [HWD Records] 
GEN Short-term Outcome (STO) 1: Increase awareness and 
knowledge of the District Wellness Policy among BPS 
families, District staff, and school leadership and staff 
STO1.1: % of schools that post WAP, council members, and 
council chair(s) contact information to their website [Profiles 
SY19-20] 


Page 44:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 44 of 102 
 
 
 
STO1.2: % of schools that send a communication about the 
policy home to parents [Profiles] 
STO1.3: % of schools that communicate policy to school staff 
[Profiles] 
GEN STO 2: Improve diverse stakeholder involvement on the 
District Wellness Council, the DWC subcommittees & 
school-based wellness councils 
STO2.1: DWC membership includes representatives from 
families, students, school and District instructional and 
operational administrators, relevant central department 
heads, school food and nutrition services staff, physical 
education and health education teachers, school nurses and 
other school health professionals (e.g. psychologists, 
guidance counselors, social workers) a school committee 
member, community youth serving agencies, Boston Public 
Health Commission representatives, healthcare providers 
and the general public [DWC Records] 
STO2.2: # of public comments made during DWC meetings 
[DWC Records] 
STO2.2: #(%) of school wellness councils with 2 or more 
family reps on the wellness council [WAPs] 
STO2.3: #(%) of school wellness councils with 2 or more 
students on the wellness council [WAPs] 


Page 45:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 45 of 102 
 
 
 
GEN STO 3: Improve policy to align with model school 
wellness policies and best practices, annual report findings 
and recommendations, input from schools and the 
community, research evidence, and government 
regulations. [DWC records] 
STO3.1: Policy updates by area 
GEN STO 4: Increase the number of schools with quality 
wellness councils [HWD Records] 
STO4.1: #(%) of schools with wellness councils that meet 
quarterly 
STO4.2: #(%) of schools with identified wellness council 
chair(s) 
GEN IMO 1: Improve the functionality of the school-based 
wellness councils [WAPs] 
IMO1.1: % of WAPs with SMART Goals 
IMO1.2: % of WAPs goals in each policy area 
IMO1.3: % of wellness council with 
IMO1.3.1: Minimum representation of member roles 
IMO1.3.2: Addition representation of member roles 


Page 46:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 46 of 102 
 
 
 
IMO1.4: % of schools with trained wellness council co-chairs 
Cultural Proficiency (CP) Metrics 
CP Process Outcomes: 
PO1: # of trainings on Equity policy and practices (e.g. Equity 
Protocol, Welcoming Schools, EQT-4) [Equity Office] 
PO2: # (%) of schools that have staff trained on CLSP 
PO3: # (%) of central office departments that have at least 
70% staff trained on CLSP 
PO4: # (%) of staff by school trained on CLSP 
CP STO 1: Increased # of schools assessing organizational 
structure, policies, and school-wide practices for cultural 
proficiency 
STO1.1: # (%) of schools with CLSP goal on their WAP 
CP STO 2: Increased # of schools engaging families, 
students, and community members in decision-making 
[WAPS] 


Page 47:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 47 of 102 
 
 
 
STO2.1: # of family members on school-based wellness 
council 
STO2.2.: # of students on school-based wellness council 
STO2.3: # of community orgs on school-based wellness 
council 
STO2.4: # (%) of schools that engage these groups in 
wellness council 
CP IMO 1: Positive perceived climate around cultural 
proficiency 
IMO1.1: District score on Community Involvement Scale 
[Climate Survey/ODA] 
IMO1.2: District score on Appreciation for Diversity Scale 
[Climate Survey/ODA] 
IMO1.3: District score on Family/School Relationship Scale 
[Climate Survey/ODA] 
IMO1.4: District score on Cultural Responsiveness Scale 
[Climate Survey/ODA] 
IMO1.5: District score on Student/Teacher Relationships Scale 
[Climate Survey/ODA] 
IMO1.6: Parent perception of school climate as safe and 
welcoming [Climate Survey/ODA] 


Page 48:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 48 of 102 
 
 
 
IMO1.7: % of middle and high school students that report 
having an adult at school that they can talk about issues in 
their life [2017 MS & HS YRBS] 
School Food & Nutrition Promotion (SFNP) Metrics 
SFNP Process Outcomes (PO) 
PO1: # (%) of schools participating in the School Breakfast 
Program [FNS Records] 
PO1.1: # (%) of schools using different models of the School 
Breakfast program 
PO2: % (#) of schools participating in School Lunch Program 
[FNS Records] 
PO2.1: % (#) of school using different models of the School 
Lunch Program 
PO3: # (%) of schools with cafeteria staff trained on food 
safety [FNS Records] 
PO4: # (%) of schools with completed kitchen inspection 
[FNS records] 
PO5: # of Healthy Food Environment Wellness Champions 
[HWD records] 
PO6: # (%) of school leaders aware of the competitive sales 


Page 49:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 49 of 102 
 
 
 
policy [HWD Records] 
PO7: # of nutrition education PDs [HWD Records] 
PO8: # of staff trained at nutrition education PDs [HWD 
Records] 
SFNP STO 1: Increase variety of foods that are local, culturally 
influenced, and clean label [FNS Records] 
STO1.1: % of food items procured by the District that are local 
STO1.2: % of menu items that are culturally influenced to 
reflect the student population 
Cafeteria Schools 
Vended Meals 
SFNP STO 2: Increase support of BIC from school 
administration 
STO2.1: #(%) of schools implementing BIC [FNS Records] 
SFNP STO 3: Increase awareness of competitive sales policy 
STO3.1: #(%) of school leaders that inform their staff of the 
competitive sales policy [Profiles] 


Page 50:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 50 of 102 
 
 
 
SFNP STO 4: Maintain 100% of schools with cafeteria staff 
with all required certifications, inspected kitchen, and a 
Hazard Analysis and Control Points plan 
STO4.1: % of schools with cafeteria staff with all required 
certifications, compliant kitchen, and a Hazard Analysis and 
Control Points plan [FNS Records] 
SFNP STO 5: Increase in schools teaching healthy eating 
habits in health education, physical education, and other 
subjects 
STO5.1: # (%) of schools teaching nutrition education through 
Comprehensive Health Education [Profiles] 
SFNP STO 6: Increase in the number of satellite schools able 
to provide bulk, freshly prepared, on-site meal service [FNS 
Records] 
STO6.1: % of schools receiving vended meals 
STO6.2: % of satellite schools that are converted to be able to 
provide bulk, freshly prepared, on-site meal service (In three 
years, all schools implementing My Way Cafe model) 
SFNP IMO 1: Increased participation in all school meal 
programs 


Page 51:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 51 of 102 
 
 
 
IMO1.1: Number or percent of schools with at least XX% of 
students participating in SBP, NSLP, CACFP, and Summer 
Meals Program [FNS Records] 
SFNP IMO 2:  Reduced food waste 
IMO2.1: Difference in weight between food served and food 
uneaten (thrown away) [BOSfoodlove] 
SFNP IMO 3: Increase in schools that do not sell, serve or 
provide food and beverages outside of the school meal plan 
that do not meet BPS nutritional guidelines [Profiles] 
IMO3.1: #(%) of schools where students cannot purchase 
snacks, meals or beverages from school vending machines 
or at a school store, fundraisers, canteen, or snack bar during 
lunch 
IMO3.2: #(%) of schools that sell food and/or beverages from 
school vending machines or at a school store, fundraisers, 
canteen, or snack bar that met BPS nutritional guidelines 
SFNP IMO 4: Increase in student practicing healthy eating 
habits [FNS Records] 
IMO4.1: # of breakfast provided 
IMO4.2: # of milk provided 


Page 52:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 52 of 102 
 
 
 
IMO4.3: # of students choosing/served a fruit 
IMO4.4: # of students choosing/served a vegetable 
Physical Activity & Physical Education (PE/PA) Metrics 
PE/PA Process Outcomes [HWD Records] 
PO1: # of PD opportunities for PE, PA and SRTS 
PO2: # of teachers in attendance at PDs 
PO3: # of IC sessions for PE, PA and SRTS 
PO4: Tools developed for school-based staff (Qual) 
PO5: # of TA sessions 
PO6: # of active PA community partnerships 
PO7: # of PE curricula distributed 
PO8: # of PE equipment distributed 
PO9: # of MS Athletic programs 
PO10: # of HS Athletic programs 
PE/PA STO1: Improve the staffing capacity of schools to 
provide PE according to Policy 
STO1.1: #(%) of schools with PE staff FTE to provide PE 


Page 53:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 53 of 102 
 
 
 
according to policy. 
PE/PA STO 2: Increase capacity of school-based staff to 
deliver high quality PE/PA programs 
School day: PE, Recess, Before/After school programming 
(including sports), SRTS [HWD Records] 
STO2.1: #(%) of schools with PE teachers completed IC during 
last 2 years 
STO2.2: #(%) of schools implementing standards-based PE 
curricula 
STO2.3: #(%) of schools with PE teachers that have 
completed PD for PE 
STO2.4: #(%) of schools with teachers that have completed 
PD for PA 
STO2.5: #(%) of schools with teachers that have completed 
PD for SRTS 
STO2.6: #(%) of schools receiving training on active recess 
PE/PA STO 3: Increase % of schools offering any PE 
STO3.1: # (%) of schools offering any amount of PE classes 
[Profiles] 


Page 54:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 54 of 102 
 
 
 
PE/PA STO 4: Increase % of schools offering recess to grades 
PreK-8 [Profiles] 
STO4.1: #(%) of schools offering at least 20 min of recess for 
grades PreK-5 
STO4.2: #(%) of schools offering at least 20 min of recess for 
grades 6-8 
PE/PA STO 5: Increase % of schools offering before- and 
after-school physical activity opportunities 
STO5.1: #(%) of schools in SRTS program [HWD Records] 
STO5.2: #(%) of schools with MS Athletic programs [Athletics 
Dept] 
STO5.3: #(%) of schools with HS Athletic programs [Athletics 
Dept] 
STO5.5: #(%) of schools offering opportunities for students to 
participate in intramural sports programs or physical activity 
clubs [Profiles] 
PE/PA STO 6: Increase % of schools not withholding physical 
activity as punishment 
STO6.1: # (%) of schools not withholding physical activity as 
punishment [Profiles] 


Page 55:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 55 of 102 
 
 
 
PE/PA STO 7: Increase number of schools that access 
resources, partnerships and supports 
STO7.1: #(%) of schools with partnerships by PA/PE type 
[Partnership Portal] 
STO7.2: #(%) of schools with resources/supports by PA/PE 
type [HWD Records] 
PE/PA STO 8: Improve collaborations between the District, 
city agencies, schools, families and schools around safe, 
active transportation  
STO8.1: # (%) of schools with identified priority walking 
routes [HWD records] 
STO8.2: # (%) of schools participating in Walk to School Day 
[HWD Records] 
STO8.3: # (%) of schools that provide pedestrian safety 
education programming [HWD Records] 
STO8.4: # (%) of schools that provide support for families 
related to walking, rolling or transit [2019 Profiles] 
STO8.5: # (%) of schools represented in requested 
transportation surveys 
PE/PA IMO 1: Increase % of students reporting having PE 


Page 56:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 56 of 102 
 
 
 
[YRBS] 
IMO1.1: # (%) MS and HS students reporting PE one or more 
times per week 
IMO1.2: # of students who receive physical education classes 
(enrollment in PE course; grade on their report card) 
PE/PA IMO 2: Increase % of schools providing PE according 
to BPS policy [Profiles] 
IMO2.1: # (%) of schools (which contain grades PreK-8) that 
are providing 45 minutes of weekly PE for students in grades 
PreK-8 
IMO2.2: # (%) of schools (which contain grades PreK-8) that 
are providing recommended 80 min of weekly PE for 
students in grades PreK-8 
IMO2.3: # (%) of schools (which contain grades 9-12) that are 
providing 1 semester of PE each year for students grades 9-
12 
PE/PA IMO 3: Increase % of students reporting active 
transportation to and from school 
IMO3.1: % of students that report walking or biking to school 
[YRBS] 


Page 57:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 57 of 102 
 
 
 
PE/PA IMO 4: Increase % of schools with grades PreK- 8 
meeting policy for 150 minutes of weekly PA 
IMO4.1: # (%) of schools providing students (PreK-8) with 150 
minutes of physical activity, including at least 45 minutes of 
PE per week and 20 minutes of recess daily [Profiles] 
PE/PA IMO 5: Improve the equity of access to athletic 
programming [Athletics] 
IMO5.1: #(%) students participating in a school sports 
program 
IMO5.2: #(%) of schools offering access to Athletics Programs 
according to the BPS Athletics Criteria for Equity 
IMO5.3: # (%) of schools with equal number of boys’ and girls’ 
athletic teams 
Comprehensive Health Education (CHE) Metrics 
CHE Process Outcomes: [HWD records] 
PO1: # of HE PD opportunities 
PO2: # of teachers/staff in attendance at PDs 
PO4: Tools developed for school-based staff (Qual) 


Page 58:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 58 of 102 
 
 
 
PO5: # of TA sessions 
PO6: # of HE related community partnerships 
PO7: # of resources provided to schools (curriculum, 
instructional supplies) 
CHE STO 1: Increase capacity of school-based staff to deliver 
high-quality, skills-based comprehensive health education 
[HWD Records] 
STO1.1: #(%) of HE teachers trained on CHE curricula 
STO1.2: #(%) of teachers/staff trained on CHE curricula 
STO1.3: #(%) of teachers/staff trained on Sexual Health Ed 
curriculum 
STO1.4: #(%) of teachers/staff reporting an increase in 
knowledge and skills post PD 
#(%) of schools with teachers who received IC 
CHE STO2: Increase number of qualified and trained 
teachers in elementary school and licensed health education 
teachers in middle and high schools 
STO2.1: # of qualified and trained teachers delivering health 
education in Elementary schools 
STO2.3: # of Licensed health education teachers delivering 


Page 59:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 59 of 102 
 
 
 
health education in Middle and High Schools 
CHE STO 3: Increased number of schools implementing 
comprehensive health education curricula for all grades 
[HWD Records/Profiles] 
STO3.1: # (%) of schools with PreK-3 grades that use 
approved curriculum 
STO3.2: # (%) of schools with 4-5 grades that use Healthy & 
Safe Body Unit 
STO3.3: # (%) of schools with 6-8 grades that use approved 
curriculum 
STO3.4: # (%) of schools with 9-12 grades that use approved 
curriculum 
CHE STO 4: Increase the number of schools providing Health 
Education [HWD Records/Profiles] 
STO4.1: # (%) of schools providing HE in 2+ elementary 
grades 
STO4.2: # (%) of schools offering 2 semesters of HE in MS 
STO4.3: # (%) of schools offering 1 semester of HE in HS 
CHE STO 5: Increase number of schools that leverage 


Page 60:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 60 of 102 
 
 
 
resources, partnerships and supports to improve the quality 
of HE [Profiles/HWD] 
STO5.1: # (%) of schools with partnerships to support HE 
teaching [Profiles] 
STO5.2: # (%) of school with partnerships to promote health 
literacy among student and families 
STO5.3: # (%) of schools accessing District 
resources/supports [Profiles] 
CHE IMO 1: Increase in number of schools providing HE 
according to BPS policy [Profiles, HWD records, OHC Staffing 
Data] 
IMO1.1: # (%) of schools with trained BPS teachers teaching 
grades 4-5 Healthy and Safe Body Unit in all classes 
IMO1.2: # (%) of schools with grades 6-8 offering at least two 
semesters of skills-based health education for all students 
taught by a licensed health education teacher 
IM1.3: # (%) of schools with grades 9-12 offering at least one 
semester of skills-based health education for all students 
taught by a licensed health education teacher 
CHE IMO 2: Increased number of students who received 
dedicated health education time [ASPEN/SIS] 


Page 61:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 61 of 102 
 
 
 
IMO2.1: # of students who receive dedicated health 
education time 
CHE IMO 3: Increase Comprehensiveness and Accessibility of 
Health Education Content [Profiles] 
Healthy School Environment (HSE) Metrics 
HSE Process Outcomes: 
PO1: School Environmental Audits [Environmental 
Division/BPHC records] 
PO1.1: #(%) of schools with SEA 
PO2: Green Cleaner Policy 
PO2.1: # of safer sanitizer bottles distributed [Facilities Mgmt] 
PO2.2: #(%) of programs trained to properly use Oxivir 
PO3: Rapid Response [Facilities Mgmt] 
PO3.1: # of custodians trained to properly clean/treat 
outbreaks 
PO3.2: Updated/Improved system for tracking 
illness/outbreak responses 
PO4: Integrated Pest Management Program [Facilities 
Mgmt/IPM contractors’ records] 


Page 62:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 62 of 102 
 
 
 
PO4.1: #(%) of Schools assigned IPM Contractors 
PO4.2: #(%) of Schools with IPM Plans 
PO5: Decluttering Initiative [Facilities Mgmt/Profiles (SY19-
20)] 
PO5.1: Creation of a BPS Declutter Guide 
PO6: Water Policy [Facilities Mgmt] 
PO6.1: # (%) online and offline schools 
PO6.2: # of drinking water units by type 
PO7: Zero Waste Policy [Facilities Mgmt] 
PO7.1: #(%) of Schools with Zero Waste Coordinators 
PO7.2: #(%) of schools with zero waste equipment/bins 
present 
PO7.3: #(%) of schools with book recycling bins 
PO7.4: #(%) of schools with textile recycling bins 
PO8: Communication of HSE Policies [Facilities 
Mgmt/HWD/MassCOSH records] 
PO8.1: Plan/strategy to communicate the Healthy School 
Environment-related policies 
PO8.2: #(%) of school leaders trained on the Healthy School 


Page 63:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 63 of 102 
 
 
 
Environment-related policies 
PO9: HSE Wellness Champion Program [Facilities 
Mgmt/HWD/MassCOSH records] 
PO9.1: # of training sessions 
PO9.2: # of schools participating in the HSE Wellness 
Champions Program 
HSE STO 1: Increase in use of SEAs to identify and address 
HSE improvements 
STO1.1: Track requests generated from SEAs [Facilities Mgmt] 
STO1.1.1: #(%) of repair requested as a result of SEA 
STO1.1.2: #(%) of repair requests completed as a result of SEA 
STO1.2: # of Principals reported reviewing results of SEA 
[Profiles] 
STO1.3: # (# of schools with) WAP goals identified using SEA 


Page 64:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 64 of 102 
 
 
 
[Profiles/WAP] 
HSE STO 2: Increase in the schools with staff using green 
cleaners in classrooms and offices 
STO2.1: #(%) of schools with staff aware of green cleaning 
policy [Profiles] 
STO2.2: % of schools with staff using green cleaners in 
classrooms and offices [Profiles] 
STO2.3: #(%) of BPS Early Ed Programs, after-school 
programs that serve food, and YMCA school-based programs 
receiving and using Oxivir [Facilities] 
HSE STO 3: Increase school capacity to address IPM incidents 
[Profiles] 
STO3.1: #(%) of schools that identified an IPM Coordinator 
STO3.2: #(%) of schools with staff that know how to use IPM 
log 
HSE STO 4: Increase schools implementing systems to 
reduce, reuse, and recycle to decrease waste and clutter 
[Facilities Mgmt] 


Page 65:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 65 of 102 
 
 
 
STO4.1: # of schools who complete declutter initiatives 
# of tons recycled 
STO4.2: #(%) of schools with complete and functioning Zero 
Waste Programs [Facilities Mgmt] 
STO4.1.1: #(%) of schools properly disposing of waste by type 
STO4.1.2: # of tons of waste removed from schools 
STO4.1.3: # of OIIT e-waste requests submitted in one year 
STO4.1.4: # of universal and hazardous waste pick-ups in one 
year 
HSE STO5: Decrease in bottled water needs [Facilities Mgmt] 
STO5.1: #(%) of offline schools returning to online 
STO5.2: #(%) of schools undergoing water infrastructure 
improvements 
HSE STO 6: Decrease in causes of poor outdoor air quality 
around school buildings 
STO6.1: #(%) of schools where staff are aware/promote 
Tobacco Free Policy [Profiles] 
STO6.2: #(%) of schools that limit busing idling to no more 
than 5 minutes [Profiles] 


Page 66:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 66 of 102 
 
 
 
HSE STO 7: Improved building infrastructure to support 
active transportation and active play 
STO7.1: # (%) of playground assessment issues addressed 
[Profiles] 
STO7.2: # (%) of schools that have bike racks or other storage 
systems for students and staff [Facilities Mgmt] 
HSE STO 8: Increase Wellness Champion projects and 
initiatives at schools [HWD Records] 
STO8.1: #(%) of HSE WAP goals 
STO8.2: #(%) of HSE WAP goals completed 
HSE IMO 1: Decrease in infection and illness outbreaks 
[Facilities Mgmt/Health Services] 
IMO1.1: # of infection and illness outbreaks 
HSE IMO 2: Decrease in pest-related incidents 
IMO2.1: #(%) of pest incidents logged, reported, and treated 
[Facilities Mgmt/IPM contractors’ records] 
HSE IMO 3: Ensure water quality, maintenance, and 
promotion 


Page 67:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 67 of 102 
 
 
 
IMO3.1: #(%) of schools getting annual water system testing 
IMO3.2:  #(%) schools with coolers cleaned 
IMO3.4: #(%) of schools that reviewed water policy with staff 
HSE LTO 1: Increase the number of high-performing school 
buildings with grounds that are clean and in good repair 
LTO1.1: SEA Trends [Facilities Mgmt] 
Safe & Supportive Schools (SSS) Metrics 
SSS Process Outcomes: 
PO1: # of Behavioral Health community partnerships [BPS 
Partnership Portal] 
PO2: #(%) of schools using universal screening for mental 
health [BHS Records] 
PO3: # of PDs/ # of attendees 
PO3.1: Bullying/Violence Prevention [Succeed Boston] 
PO3.2: Restorative Justice [Succeed Boston] 
PO3.3: K-12 SEL Standards [SEL-I & SAWS Records] 
PO3.4: Targeted interventions for vulnerable populations 


Page 68:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 68 of 102 
 
 
 
[BHS/Succeed Boston/Opportunity Youth Records] 
PO3.5: MTSS/CBHM [BHS Records] 
PO4: #(%) of schools with Student Support Team [Profiles] 
PO5: #(%) of middle and high schools with EPS liaisons 
[Profiles] 
PO6: #(%) of schools with a Homelessness Liaison 
[Opportunity Youth] 
PO7: #(%) of schools with trained Bullying Prevention 
Liaisons [Profiles] 
SSS STO 1: Increased # of schools trained in BPS K-12 SEL 
standards 
STO1.1: # (%) of schools that have all staff trained in BPS K-12 
SEL standards [Profiles] 
SSS STO 2: Increased implementation of Multi-tiered System 
of Supports (MTSS-B) to improve school and classroom 
climate [Profiles] 
STO2.1: % (#) of schools that offer tier 1 supports 
STO2.2: % (#) of schools that offer tier 2 supports 
STO2.3: % (#) of schools that offer tier 3 supports 


Page 69:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 69 of 102 
 
 
 
STO2.4: % (#) of schools that implement Restorative Justice 
SSS STO 3: Increased targeted interventions for vulnerable 
populations [Profiles] 
STO3.1: #(%) of schools with gay straight alliances 
STO3.2: #(%) of schools providing additional supports to 
vulnerable populations 
SSS STO 4: Increased CBHM implementation fidelity [BHS 
Records] 
STO4.1: Tiered fidelity inventory (measure normed) schools in 
CBHM model use 
STO4.2: # of students screened in CBHM schools, fall and 
spring screening 
SSS STO 5: Increased # of schools with all staff trained on 
bullying prevention 
STO5.1: #(%) of schools with staff trained on bullying 
prevention [Profiles] 
SSS STO 6: Increase in the number of schools with behavioral 
health partner supports 


Page 70:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 70 of 102 
 
 
 
STO6.1: #(%) of schools with a minimum of  3 behavioral 
supports partners [BHS Records] 
SSS STO 7: Increase in schools appropriately staffed to meet 
the mental, emotional, and behavioral health needs of 
students as determined by the BPS staffing criteria for 
school psychologists, social workers, and guidance 
counselors 
STO7.1: #(%) school appropriately staffed according to BPS 
criteria [BHS/OHC Records] 
SSS STO 8: Increased quality of Student Support Teams 
STO8.1: % of schools indicating a “yes” on the following 
Profiles question: “Include the following positions on their 
SST: school psychologists, social workers, guidance 
counselors (for only HS), school nurses, community partners 
and trained classroom teachers” [Profiles] 
STO8.1: % of schools achieving Quality Index TBD 
SSS STO 9: Increased awareness of EPS policy and resources 
for students 
STO9.1: % of schools with an Expectant & Parenting Student 
liaison [Profiles] 


Page 71:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 71 of 102 
 
 
 
SSS IMO 1: Improved system for handling bullying incidents 
in schools 
IMO1.1: TBD 
IMO1.3: # of bullying incidents reported 
SSS IMO 2: Increased # schools with all teachers 
implementing explicit SEL instruction 
IMO2.1: # (%) of CBHM schools with all teachers teaching 
explicit SEL Instruction with fidelity. [BHS Records (SEL 
Instruction tool: fidelity measure)] 
IMO2.2: # (%) of all schools implementing [Profiles] 
SSS IMO 3: Decrease incidents of violence at schools 
IMO3.1: # of students with Code of Conduct Violations 
(violence)/Suspensions [SIS] 
IMO3.2: # of school referrals to Succeed Boston for violent 
offenses [Succeed Boston] 
SSS IMO 4: Increase number of schools with safe school 
climate [School Climate Survey/ODA] 


Page 72:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 72 of 102 
 
 
 
IMO4.1: District score on Sense of Belonging Scale 
IMO4.2: District score on Student Emotional Safety Scale 
IMO4.3: District score on Staff Support Scale 
IMO4.4: District score on Student Physical Safety Scale 
SSS IMO 5: Decrease in crisis/behavioral response requests 
from schools [Health Services/BHS] 
IMO5.1: # of incidents where ambulance or police has been 
called for behavioral health needs 
SSS IMO 6: Increase SEL Skills in students 
IMO6.1: BIMAS adaptive scales (CBHM schools) 
IMO6.2: TBD-District-wide 
SSS IMO 7: Increase in expectant and parenting students 
accessing resources 
IMO7.1: # (%) of schools with EPS liaisons 
using/communicating liaison supports [Profiles] 
Health Services Metrics 
HS Process Outcomes: 


Page 73:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 73 of 102 
 
 
 
PO1: Quality Improvement [HS Records] 
PO1.1: Electronic Medical Record Protocols written 
PO1.2: Formula for staffing school nurses developed 
PO1.3: System for creating a universal scorecard for nursing 
practice 
PO1.4: Nurse support system established 
PO2: Professional Development for Nurses [HS Records] 
PO2.1: #(%) of nurses trained 
PO2.3: #(%) of schools with nurses trained 
PO2.4: # of Nursing PD opportunities by type 
PO3: Nurse Liaison Technical Assistance [HS records] 
PO3.1: # of TA sessions 
PO3.2: # of schools receiving TA 
PO4: School Nurse Direct Services [SNAPNurse] 
PO4.1: # of injury visits 
PO4.2: # of acute disease management visits 
PO4.3: # of chronic disease management visits 
PO4.4: # of visit for treatments and medications 


Page 74:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 74 of 102 
 
 
 
PO4.5: Case management (school nurse/PCP/parent) 
PO4.6: # of screenings/referral/completed referrals 
PO4.7: School Nurse Referrals 
PO4.7.1: # of referrals to HRCs 
PO4.7.2: # of referrals to SBHCs 
PO4.7.3: # of referrals for acute medical management 
PO4.7.4: # of referrals for chronic disease management 
PO5: # of nurse-led school staff training sessions 
PO6: # of Individual and group sessions with students 
PO7: # of health promotions 
PO8: Community partner services 
PO8.1: HRCs 
PO8.2: SBHCs 
PO8.3: # of schools receiving community partnerships by 
type 
PO9: Condom Accessibility [HWD records] 
PO9.1: % of high schools with CATs 
PO9.3: % of CAT members trained on how to make referrals 


Page 75:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 75 of 102 
 
 
 
and provide condoms 
HS STO 1: Increase schools appropriately staffed to meet the 
medical needs of students as determined by the BPS Health 
Services staffing criteria 
STO1.1: # (%) school appropriately staffed according to BPS 
criteria [OHC] 


Page 76:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 76 of 102 
 
 
 
HS STO 2: Increase capacity of school-based staff to deliver 
high quality nursing services 
STO2.1: #(%) of schools with nurses receiving required Health 
Service Professional Develop (18 hour and/or monthly 
exemplar practice) 
STO2.2: # of nurses reviewed using the Health Services 
Scorecard 
STO2.3: # of schools with 90% or greater of immunization 
compliance 
STO2.4: % of Individual Health Care Plans (IHCP) 
STO2.5: % of schools with 90% or greater compliance with 
District physical exam policy 
STO2.6: # One-on-one counseling 
STO2.7: # of nurses receiving National Asthma Certification 
HS STO 3: Improve school-wide awareness for students with 
chronic disease 
STO3.1: % of schools that have all Individual Health Care 
Plans (IHCP) for students with Individual Education Plans 
with required signatures [SNAPNurse] 
HS STO 4: Increase the % of students receiving state-


Page 77:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 77 of 102 
 
 
 
mandated screenings [SNAPNurse] 
STO4.1: # (%) of schools with XX% of students screened 
STO4.1.1: Hearing screening 
STO4.1.2: Vision screening 
STO4.1.3: SBIRT screening 
STO4.1.4: Height & Weight (Body Mass Index) 
STO4.2: # (%) of students with referrals for failed screening 
STO4.3: # (%) of students with completed referrals for failed 
screenings 
HS STO 5: Increase % of students visiting the nurse that are 
able to return to the classroom for continued learning 
STO5.1: % of students returning to their classroom 
[SNAPNurse] 
HS STO 6: Increase the schools with nurse-lead health 
promotions campaigns 
STO6.1: #(%) schools conducting nurse-lead health 
promotions campaigns [ESHS Data] 
HS STO 7: Increase in the % of CATs making referrals and 


Page 78:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 78 of 102 
 
 
 
providing condoms [ESHS Data] 
STO7.1: # of condoms distributed by CATs 
STO7.2: # of sexual health referrals by CATs 
STO7.3: % of schools with functioning CATs 
HS STO 8: Increase the provision of sexual health referrals 
[Profiles] 
STO8.1: % of middle and high schools with nurses providing 
sexual health referrals to students 
HS STO 9: Increase in the provision sexual health services 
[Profiles] 
STO9.1: % of middle and high schools with nurses providing 
sexual health referrals to students 
HS IMO 1: Improved school-wide management for students 
with chronic disease 
IMO1.1: # of dismissals from school related to chronic disease 
[SNAPNurse/TBD] 
Staff Wellness (SW) Metrics 


Page 79:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 79 of 102 
 
 
 
SW Process Outcomes: 
PO1: # of District communications on staff wellness related 
topics [External Affairs/TBD] 
PO2: DWC Staff Wellness Subcommittee co-chairs identified 
[DWC Records] 
PO3: # Subcommittee meetings held [DWC Records] 
SW STO 1: Increased staff physical activity 
STO1.1: % of staff reporting at least 30 minutes of physical 
activity a day [TBD] 
SW STO 2: Increased staff healthy eating 
STO2.1: % of staff reporting eating 5 servings of fruits and 
vegetables in a day [TBD] 
SW STO 3: Increased % of schools with staff wellness 
activities and initiatives [Profiles] 
STO3.1: % of schools with staff wellness as a goal on their 
Wellness Action Plan 
STO3.2: % of schools that answered yes to “In the past school 
year, did your school offer any staff wellness initiatives?” 


Page 80:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 80 of 102 
 
 
 
SW IMO 1: Increase in teachers’ school climate 
IMO1.1: Improve professional community 
IMO1.2: Improve support for teacher development and 
growth 
SW IMO 2: Increased % of schools with an institutionalized 
Staff Wellness Program 
IMO2.1: % of schools with a staff wellness promotion or 
program that took place for an extended duration across the 
year. [Profiles/WAP] 
WELLNESS POLICY LONG-TERM STUDENT IMPACTS 
1. Improve student physical fitness 
a. % of students achieving health fitness levels (Source: 
Fitnessgram) 
i. Health Fitness Zone in ⅗ assessments 
ii. Health Fitness Zone for aerobic capacity 
2. Reduce prevalence of health-risk behaviors among 
students (Source: YRBS) 
a. % of students who have ever had sexual intercourse 


Page 81:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 81 of 102 
 
 
 
b. % of students who had sexual intercourse in the last 3 
months (i.e sexually active) 
c. % of students who had sexual intercourse with four or 
more persons during their life 
d. % of students who have ever been pregnant or gotten 
someone pregnant 
e. % of students who did not go to school because they 
felt unsafe at school or on their way to or from school 
(in the last 30 days) 
f. % of students who carried a weapon on school 
property (in the last 30 days) 
g. % of students who were threatened or injured with a 
weapon on school property (in the past 12 months) 
h. % of students who were in a physical fight on school 
property (in the past 12 months) 
i. % of students who were bullied on school property (in 
the past 12 months) 
j. % of students who were electronically bullied (in the 
past 12 months) 
k. % of students who experienced physical dating 
violence (in the past 12 months) 
l. % of students who experienced sexual dating violence 


Page 82:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 82 of 102 
 
 
 
(in the past 12 months) 
m.% of students who were ever physically forced to have 
sexual intercourse (when they did not want to) 
3. Increase in protective health behaviors among students 
(Source: YRBS) 
a. % of students who used a condom during last sexual 
intercourse (among students who were currently 
sexually active) 
b. % of students who used effective hormonal birth 
control† to prevent pregnancy (during last sexual 
intercourse among students who were currently 
sexually active) 
c. % of students who used a condom and effective 
hormonal birth control during last sexual intercourse 
(among students who were currently sexually active) 
d. % of students who were ever tested for HIV (not 
including tests done when donating blood) 
e. % of students who were physically active at least 60 
minutes per day on all 7 days 
f. % of students who did not watch 3+ hours of TV (on an 
average school day) 
g. % of students who did not play video or computer 
games or used a computer for 3+ hours per day (for 


Page 83:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 83 of 102 
 
 
 
something that was not school work, on an average 
school day) 
h. % of students who ate breakfast daily (in the past 
week) 
i. % of students who ate fruit or drank 100% fruit juices 2+ 
times per day (in the past week) 
j. % of students who ate vegetables 2+ times daily (in the 
past week) 
k. % of students who drank 3+ glasses of water daily (in 
the past week) 
l. % of students who drank 1+ glasses of milk daily (in the 
past week) 
m.% of students who did not drink a soda (in the past 
week) 
n. % of students who did not drink a sugar-sweetened 
beverage† (in the past week) 
4. Improve feeling of school connectedness among students 
(Source: YRBS & Climate Survey) 
a. % of students who have at least one teacher or other 
adult in their school that they can talk to if they have a 
problem 


Page 84:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 84 of 102 
 
 
 
b. District score on student engagement in school scale 
c. District score on appreciation for diversity scale 
d. District score on student civic participation scale 
5. Improve student social-emotional wellbeing 
a. District score on student social emotional health scale 
b. District score on student growth mindset scale  
c. District score on student perseverance and 
determination scale 
6. Improve student mental health outcomes (Source: YRBS) 
a. % of students who felt depressed (sad or hopeless 
almost every day for two weeks or more in a row that 
stopped them from doing some usual activities) 
b. % of students who did something to purposely hurt 
themselves without wanting to die 
c. % of students who seriously considered attempting 
suicide 
d. % of students who attempted suicide 
7. Reduce prevalence of substance use among students 
a. % of students who currently used tobacco products 
(cigarettes, cigars, smokeless tobacco, electronic vapor 


Page 85:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 85 of 102 
 
 
 
products) 
b. % of students who currently smoked cigarettes or 
cigars 
c. % of students who currently used electronic vapor 
products 
d. % of students who currently drank alcohol 
e. % of students who currently binge drank (males 5+ 
drinks; females 4+ drinks in a row) 
f. % of students who currently used marijuana 
g. % of students who ever took prescription pain 
medication without a doctor’s prescription or 
differently from how a doctor told them to use it 
8. Increase prevalence of students with health weight status 
a. % of students with health MI status (Source: 
SNAPNurse) 
9. Reduce in prevalence of asthma among students 
a. % of students with asthma diagnosis 
(Source:SNAPNurse) 
10. Reduce the prevalence of sexually transmitted diseases, 
HIV, and adolescent pregnancy among students (Source: 


Page 86:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 86 of 102 
 
 
 
BPHC) 
a. Incidence rate for chlamydia among Boston youth  
b. Incidence rate for gonorrhea among Boston youth  
c. Incidence rate for Incidence rate for gonorrhea among 
Boston youth among Boston youth  
d. Prevalence of Boston youth living with HIV  
e. Birth rate among adolescent females  
11. Decrease number of medically-related absences among 
students (Source: ODA) 
a. # of medically-related absences among students 
12. Improve school climate for staff (Source: School Climate 
Survey) 
 
III. DEFINITIONS 
  
All students attend a Boston Public School and include but are 
not limited to students with identities that are related to culture, 
race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, and 
ability. 
  


Page 87:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 87 of 102 
 
 
 
Bullying is a form of emotional or physical abuse that has three 
defining characteristics*: 
● Deliberate: A bully’s intention is to hurt someone. 
● Repeated: A bully often targets the same victim again and 
again. 
● Power imbalanced: A bully chooses victims he or she 
perceives as vulnerable. 
*Bullying is different from conflict, fights, or disagreements. It 
must meet the above criteria. 
  
Boston Public Schools Property includes all properties where 
students and Boston Public School staff work or attend class. 
  
Comprehensive Health Education is medically accurate, age and 
developmentally appropriate, culturally inclusive, implemented 
in safe and supportive learning environments where all students 
feel valued, and includes nutrition education.  
  
Comprehensive School Physical Activity Program (CSPAP) is an 
approach by which school Districts and schools utilize all 
opportunities for school-based physical activity to develop 
physically educated students who participate in physical activity 
each day and develop the knowledge, skills, and confidence to be 


Page 88:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 88 of 102 
 
 
 
physically active for a lifetime. Quality physical education is the 
cornerstone of a CSPAP.  CSPAP also includes school-based 
physical activity opportunities; school employee wellness and 
involvement; and family and community involvement. 
  
Comprehensive Sexual Health Education is a planned, 
sequential, Pre-K – 12 curriculum that is part of a comprehensive 
school health approach which addresses age-appropriate 
physical, mental, emotional and social dimensions of human 
sexuality. It should allow students to develop and demonstrate 
developmentally appropriate sexual health-related knowledge, 
attitudes, skills and practices. The curriculum should be designed 
to motivate and assist students to maintain and improve their 
sexual health by delaying sexual initiation, preventing disease 
and too-early pregnancy and reducing sexual health-related risk 
behaviors. It should be medically accurate, developmentally 
appropriate, culturally, including LGBTQ inclusive, and be 
provided by qualified, trained, and certified teachers (Future of 
Sex Education). 
  
Cultural Proficiency: esteeming culture, interacting effectively in 
a variety of cultural groups, using inclusive language, committing 
to continuous learning. 
  
Cyber bullying is bullying that takes place using electronic 
technology. Examples of cyber bullying include mean text 


Page 89:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 89 of 102 
 
 
 
messages or emails, rumors sent by email or posted on social 
networking sites, and embarrassing pictures, videos, websites, or 
fake profiles. 
  
Federally Funded Child Nutrition Programs include the National 
School Lunch Program, National School Breakfast Program, After 
School Snack Program, and the Child & Adult Care Food Program. 
  
LGBTQ is an acronym for individuals who identify as Lesbian, Gay, 
Bisexual, Transgender, Queer or Questioning. 
  
Health Literacy is the capacity of an individual to obtain, 
interpret, and understand basic health information and services 
and the competence to use such information and services in 
ways that are health enhancing (National Health Education 
Standards). 
  
Health Services represents the component of a comprehensive 
school health program that directly services the individual child 
and monitors health trends within the District. It includes both 
the school nurse programs and the school-based health center 
programs. The goal of health services is to remove the 
educationally relevant health obstacles to learning by ensuring 
access and/or referral to primary health care services, managing 


Page 90:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 90 of 102 
 
 
 
chronic disease conditions during school hours, preventing and 
controlling communicable disease and other health problems, 
providing emergency care for illness or injury, promoting and 
providing optimum sanitary conditions for a safe school facility 
and school environment and providing educational and 
counseling opportunities for promoting and maintaining 
individual family and community health. 
  
Nutrition Promotions are strategies, social marketing, materials, 
and oral & written communications that provide methods to shift 
cultural norms toward healthier foods and beverages.  
  
Parent engagement occurs when schools are actively involving 
parents in an authentic partnership with aims of improving 
individual student’s outcomes and school wide initiatives. 
  
Physical Education (PE) is a planned, sequential program of 
curricula and instruction that helps students develop the 
knowledge, attitudes, motor skills, self-management skills and 
confidence needed to adopt and maintain physically active 
lifestyles. PE curricula must align with the BPS PE frameworks.  
PE activities that focus on a single activity, such as swimming 
and dance, count as PE only if it is part of a CSPAP and aligned 
with BPS PE Frameworks. 
  


Page 91:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 91 of 102 
 
 
 
Physical Activity (PA) is a behavior consisting of bodily movement 
that requires energy expenditure above the normal physiological 
(muscular, cardiorespiratory) requirements of a typical school 
day. Recess, movement breaks, promotional activities, and cross-
curricular incorporation are some examples of PA that should 
NOT be counted as PE; PA is not PE and it cannot be allocated as 
PE. 
  
Safe and Supportive Schools create a positive school climate that 
actively teaches positive behavior and engaging in prevention 
activities to promote feelings of security and connectedness for 
students and adults.  
  
Wellness is a process by which individuals move toward optimal 
physical and mental health, regardless of current health status or 
disability, by practicing healthy choices within an enabling 
environment that encourages healthy decision-making. 
                                                                                                                                     
 
 
 IV.  
INDEX OF FEDERAL, STATE, AND BOSTON 
PUBLIC SCHOOL WELLNESS-RELATED POLICIES & 
GUIDELINES 
 
  
Relevant and existing school policies, for which school-based 


Page 92:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 92 of 102 
 
 
 
Wellness Councils and school staff must comply, are referenced 
below. 
  
A. School Food and Nutrition Promotion-related policies shall be 
followed by all Boston Public Schools: 
○ Meals served in Boston Public Schools are in accordance 
with the National School Meals Programs. Federally funded 
child nutrition programs must comply with the nutrition 
standards for school meals, outlined in the Healthy Hunger-
Free Kids Act of 2010. 
○ 105 CMR 225: Nutrition Standards for Competitive Foods and 
Beverages in Public Schools 
○ Mayor Menino’s Executive Order for Healthy Beverages 
○ FNS-01: Food Nutrition Services 
○ FNS-02: Emergency Meal Procedures 
○ FNS-03: Nutrition Policy 
○ FNS-04: Responsibilities Regarding School Food Services 
  
B. Comprehensive Physical Activity and Physical Education-
related policies shall be followed by all Boston Public Schools: 
a. Massachusetts Legislation 


Page 93:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 93 of 102 
 
 
 
○ MGL c. 71, s. 3: Physical Education 
b. District Circulars 
○ HWD-02: Physical Education and Physical Activity Policy 
○ ATH-01: Prevention & Management of Sports-Related 
Head Injuries 
  
C. Comprehensive Health Education-related policies shall be 
followed by all Boston Public Schools: 
○ HWD-03: Comprehensive Health Education Policy 
○ HWD-05: Human Sexuality Education-Parental Notification 
  
D. Healthy School Environment-related policies shall be followed 
by all Boston Public Schools: 
a. Massachusetts Legislation 
○ MGL c. 90, s. 16B Idling of a motor vehicle engine on 
school property 
b. District Circulars 
○ BPS Water Access Policy 
○ FMT-07: Chemical Inventory “Right to Know” Law 
○ FMT-08: System-wide Zero Waste Policy 


Page 94:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 94 of 102 
 
 
 
○ FMT-10: Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
○ FMT-11: Green Cleaners Policy 
○ FMT-14 Hearing Conservation Program 
○ FMT-15: BPS/Boston Public Health Commission 
Environmental Inspection/Audit Program (City 
Ordinance 7.12.1-4) 
○ FSE-06: Student Safety / Health in School Shops, 
Laboratories and Classrooms 
○ HWD-04: Whole School Health & Wellness: Healthy 
School Environment Policy 
○ HWD-06: Tobacco Free Environment Policy 
○ SHS-04: Infection Prevention and Control in School 
Settings 
○ SHS-20: Asthma in Schools 
  
E. Safe and Supportive Schools-related policies shall be followed 
by all Boston Public Schools: 
a. Federal Legislation 
○ Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as 
amended, Title IV, Part A, Subpart 2, Section 4121 - 
FEDERAL ACTIVITIES; 20 U.S.C. 7131 


Page 95:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 95 of 102 
 
 
 
b. Federal Regulations 
○ Education Department General Administrative 
Regulations (EDGAR) - 34 CFR Parts 75, 77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 
84, 85, 86, 97, 98, 99 (b) The regulation in 34 CFR part 299 
○ Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 19641 (Title VI), which 
prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, or 
national origin; 
○ Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 19733 (Section 
504); and Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 
19904 (Title II). Section 504 and Title II prohibit 
discrimination on the basis of disability,5  as referenced 
in the Office of the Assistant Secretary’s “Dear 
Colleague” letter of October 2010. 
○ Title IX, Education Amendments of 1972 which prohibits 
discrimination on the basis of sex, including individuals 
who are pregnant or parenting. 
■ Title 20 U.S.C. Sections 1681-1688 
c. Massachusetts Legislation 
○  SL 2010, c.92: Bullying in Schools 
○ MGL c.12, s.11H: Violation of Constitutional Rights 
○ MGL c.265 s.43: Stalking 
○ MGL c.265, s.43A: Criminal Harassment 
○ MGL c.266, s.37E: Identity Fraud 


Page 96:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 96 of 102 
 
 
 
○ MGL c.269, s.17: Hazing 
○ MGL c.269, s.18: Failure to Report Hazing 
○ MGL c.269, s.19: Schools to provide copy of hazing law to 
students 
○ MGL c.119, s.21: Mandated Reporters defined. 
○ MGL c.119, s.51A: Mandated Reporting explained 
○ MGL c.76, s. 5 An Act Relative to Gender Identity 
○ CHAPTER 188 An Act Improving the Public Schools of 
the Commonwealth 
d. Massachusetts Regulations 
○ 610 CMR 5 Hazing Reporting- Secondary Schools 
○ 603 CMR 33 Hazing Reporting- Higher Educations 
○ 603 CMR 49 Notification of Bullying or Retaliation 
e. District Circulars         
 
○ ACA-18: Attendance Policies 
○ ACA18A: Attendance Procedures 
○ ACA-18B: Procedures for Referral to Supervisors of 
Attendance 
○ EQT-07: Accommodating Employees with Disabilities 


Page 97:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 97 of 102 
 
 
 
○ EQT-05: Employee Reports of Bias 
○ EQT-02: Student, Family or Other Third Party Reports of 
Bias 
○ EQT-01: Non-Discrimination Policy and Statement 
○ EQT-06: Sexual Misconduct Toward Employees 
○ EQT-03: Sexual Misconduct Toward Students 
○ EQT-04: Students and Gender Identity   
○ LGL-11: Sexual Orientation – Protection of Students 
Against Discrimination 
○ FAM-01: School Site Councils 
○ FAM-02: School Parent Council 
○ FAM-03: Middle and High School Student Government 
○ FAM-05: Title I Family Engagement Requirements   
○ FSE-01: School Safety Contingency Plans 
○ FSE-02 Fire Safety Practices 
○ FSE-04 Bomb Threat Procedures 
○ FSE-05 Medical Emergency Management 
○ FSE-06 Student Safety / Health in School Shops, 
Laboratories and Classrooms 


Page 98:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 98 of 102 
 
 
 
○ FSE-07 Public Health and Workplace Safety 
○ FSE-08 Teaching Students the Containment Protocol 
Mini-Session 
○ LGL-01 Hazing Law 
○ LGL-04 School Visitors Guidelines 
○ LGL-05 Racial or Ethnic Discrimination/Harassment of 
Students 
○ LGL-06 Religious Holy Days 
○ LGL-13 Sexual Assault Policy 
○ LGL-15 Student Surveys 
○ LGL-17 Religious Expression in Public Schools 
○ LGL-20 Corporal Punishment 
○ SAF-01 Student Search Procedures 
○ SAF-02 Weapons and Objects of No Reasonable Use 
○ SAF-04 Incident Data Reporting and Release 
○ SAF-07 Metal Detectors 
○ SAF-09 Lost Children Procedures 
○ SAF-11 Sexual Offender Registry Information (SORI) 
○ SAF-12: School Access Control 


Page 99:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 99 of 102 
 
 
 
○ SHS-01: Drug and Alcohol Abuse 
○ SHS-16: Suicide Prevention and Intervention 
○ SPE-03: Physical Restraint Policy 
○ SPE-14: Counseling Guidelines 
○ SPE-15: Discipline of Students with Disabilities 
○ SSS-02: Homeless Students - Guidelines and Procedures   
○ SSS-07: Persistently Dangerous Schools 
○ SSS-18: Bullying Prevention and Intervention Plan 
○ SUP-20: Child Abuse and Neglect 
○ SUP-21: Expectant & Parenting Students 
○ SUP-05: Code of Discipline 
  
F. Health Services-related policies shall be followed by all Boston 
Public Schools 
○ ATH-01: Prevention & Management of Sports-Related Head 
Injuries 
○ FSE-05 Medical Emergencies 
○ SHS-23: Condom Accessibility 
○ LGL-16: Student Health Information 


Page 100:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 100 of 102 
 
 
 
○ SHS-04: Infection Prevention and Control in School Settings 
○ SHS-05: Tuberculosis Program 
○ SHS-06: Immunization Law 
○ SHS-08: Medication Dispensation 
○ SHS-11: Life Threatening Allergies (LTA or Anaphylaxis) Policy 
and Implementation 
○ SHS-12: HIV/AID Policy and Guidelines 
○ SHS-13: Medical Transportation 
○ SHS-20: Asthma in Schools 
○ SHS-21: Diabetes Policy 
○ SHS-22: Automatic External Defibrillator (AED) Use and 
Access Policy 
  
G. Cultural Proficiency-related policies shall be followed by all 
Boston Public Schools 
○ CAO-05: Services to Limited English Proficient Students 
○ ELL-04: Title I Expenditures for English Language Learners 
○ EQT-01: Non-Discrimination Policy and Statement  
○ EQT-02: Student, Family or Other Third Party Reports of Bias 


Page 101:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 101 of 102 
 
 
 
○ EQT-03: Sexual Misconduct Toward Students 
○ EQT-05: Employee Reports of Bias 
○ EQT-06: Sexual Misconduct Toward Employees    
 
○ EQT-07: Accommodating Employees with Disabilities         
  
○ FAM-02: School Site Councils 
○ FAM-01: School Parent Council 
○ FAM-03: Middle and High School Student Government 
○ FAM-05: Title I Family Engagement Requirements 
○ FAM-06: Boston Student Advisory Council 
○ LGL-05: Racial or Ethnic Discrimination/Harassment of 
Students 
○ LGL-11: Sexual Orientation - Protection of Students Against 
Discrimination  
 
 
 
 


Page 102:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 102 of 102 
 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director of Health & Wellness 
Departmen
t: 
Health & Wellness 
Mailing 
Address: 
370 Columbia Rd, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9698 
Email: 
healthandwellness@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
HWD-03  
Version 01 
 
 
 
 
COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH EDUCATION POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
BACKGROUND 
Health education, as defined by the CDC, helps students “acquire 
functional health knowledge, strengthen attitudes and beliefs, 
and practice skills needed to adopt and maintain healthy 
behaviors throughout their lives.” Health education curricula 
should address the National Health Education Standards (NHES), 
incorporate the characteristics of an effective health education 
curriculum, and be taught by qualified, trained teachers. In 
addition, the American Cancer Society, the American Diabetes 
Association, and the American Heart Association believe that 
school health education programs can reduce health risk 
behaviors such as tobacco use, poor nutrition, lack of physical 
activity, drug and alcohol use, as well as actions that increase 
stress and risk of injury and violence. Because these behaviors are 
amenable to change, quality school health education taught by 
trained and licensed health educators provides the best 
opportunity to promote positive health behavior among children 
and adolescents.What Works in Schools  (Facts: Learning for Life 
Health Education in School)  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 2 of 11 
 
 
 
Health education is an integral component of quality school 
programming. Schools have direct contact with a significant 
number of Boston’s youth and for the critical years of students’ 
social, psychological, physical, and intellectual development. As a 
result, schools play an important role in improving students’ 
health and social outcomes as well as promoting academic 
success (CDC Healthy Schools). Healthy students are more ready 
and able to learn and are less likely to experience negative 
academic impact (e.g., academic failure, lower test scores, 
truancy, absenteeism) than students who engage in risky health 
behaviors. According to the CDC, schools cannot achieve their 
primary mission of education if students are not healthy, and 
schools can address the health needs of students in part through 
effective comprehensive health education. Research supports 
that school health programs and policies may be one of the most 
efficient ways to reduce risky behaviors in students, prevent 
health problems, and address the achievement gap. 
Boston Public Schools (BPS) believes, in accordance with the 
NHES, health education should empower students to practice 
behaviors that protect and promote their health while 
minimizing risks. Therefore, health education in BPS includes 
teaching health skills and essential concepts such as health 
literacy, health promotion, and health equity, with a strong focus 
on understanding the social determinants of health. 
In line with the NHES, BPS emphasizes a holistic approach to 
health by shifting the focus from specific health behaviors to 
overall well-being. This approach leverages the strengths and 
resources within students, their families, schools, and 
communities. It prioritizes equipping students with the health 
skills and essential knowledge needed to assist them in living 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 3 of 11 
 
 
 
healthier lives and to enable them to actively support their own 
health and the health of others within a broader societal context. 
The policy and implementation guidelines presented here 
explain how we, at Boston Public Schools, will create effective 
health education programming. 
  
POLICY 
The Boston Public Schools require comprehensive Pre-K through 
grade 12 health education that is medically accurate, age and 
developmentally appropriate, culturally and linguistically 
sustaining, and implemented in a safe and supportive learning 
environment where all students feel valued. All Boston Public 
Schools must take a skills-based approach to teach 
comprehensive health education that addresses a variety of 
topics, such as tobacco, alcohol, substance misuse and harm 
reduction, nutritional health, mental and emotional health, 
personal health and wellness, physical activity, safety and injury 
prevention, violence prevention, and comprehensive sexual 
health education that is LGBTQ+ affirming.  
 
Comprehensive health education curriculum shall be modified as 
needed for students with disabilities and students who are 
English learners. It shall promote healthy lifestyle habits, healthy 
relationships and health literacy for all students. Health 
education curricula will align with the BPS Health Education 
Frameworks, which integrate the Massachusetts Comprehensive 
Health and Physical Education Framework and National Health 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 4 of 11 
 
 
 
Education Standards, as well as the National Sexuality Education 
Standards. Qualified and trained teachers will implement the 
curricula. 
 
All schools will follow relevant promotion and graduation 
requirements that include: Health education that includes at 
minimum the Healthy and Safe Body Unit in elementary school; 
two semesters of health education in grades 6 to 8 taught by a 
licensed health education teacher; and a one-semester course of 
health education in total in grades 9 to 12 taught by a licensed 
health education teacher. In addition to these course 
requirements, health education topics will be integrated into 
other subject areas where possible, to reinforce their importance, 
provide additional skill practice, and demonstrate the 
connections of health concepts to many other content areas. 
  
IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES 
Boston Public Schools are committed to addressing the health 
and wellness of all students, in part, through effective health 
education programming. Therefore, BPS will require 
comprehensive pre-K-12 health education to be taught to all 
students throughout the district. The Boston Public Schools take 
a comprehensive approach to review and incorporate changes in 
policy, curricula, and implementation. This effort will result in a 
skills-based approach to teaching health education that 
promotes healthy lifestyle habits, healthy relationships, and 
health literacy for all students.  
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 5 of 11 
 
 
 
Schools will adhere to the following implementation guidelines: 
A. School leaders or their designees are responsible for 
implementing and enforcing this policy. Grade-level teams, 
lead health education teacher, or other instructional lead 
will determine, in collaboration with the school leader, how 
their school will meet the policy requirements relating to 
time, staffing, and implementation. School leaders may 
consult with the Director of Health Education in the Office of 
Health and Wellness on how their school can meet the 
policy requirements. 
 
B. BPS Policy requires that all students in PreK-12 should 
receive health education in line with promotion and 
graduation requirements that include a minimum of: 
a. The BPS Healthy and Safe Body Unit in elementary 
school 
b. Two semesters of health education in total grades 6 to 
8   
c. A one-semester course of health education in total in 
grades 9 to 12.   
C.  
 The National Health Education Standards recommend 
i. 
Pre-K to grade 2 receive a minimum of 40 hours of 
HE each year.  
ii. 
Grades 3 to 12 receive a minimum of 80 hours of 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 6 of 11 
 
 
 
HE each year.  
D. Staffing requirements: 
a. BPS supports a learning environment in which all 
teachers are highly qualified in the subject areas they 
teach. Therefore:  
i. 
In grades K-5, HE instruction must be 
implemented by trained teachers who hold an 
active and valid teaching license. 
ii. 
In grades 6-12, HE instruction must be 
implemented by trained teachers with an active 
and valid health education teaching license. 
b. If a school is unable to provide students with HE 
instruction from licensed teachers, they should contact 
the Office of Health and Wellness for support with 
identifying district-approved staffing alternatives. All 
HE staffing alternatives should be approved by the 
Office of Human Capital, the Office of Health and 
Wellness, and the school’s respective instructional 
superintendent. Staffing alternatives are only 
considered in extenuating circumstances or in 
situations that increase opportunities for students. 
E. The BPS HE curriculum must meet the following criteria. 
The district-endorsed curriculum is:  
a. Aligned with the 2023 Massachusetts Comprehensive 
Health and Physical Education Framework and 2024 
National Health Education Standards, as well as the 
2020 National Sex Education Standards 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 7 of 11 
 
 
 
b. Comprehensive, standards-based, and sequential; 
teaching a variety of skills and topics in such a way that 
student learning and skill development is built upon 
with each unit and each year 
c. Inclusive of a variety of topics, such as tobacco, alcohol, 
and other drug misuse; healthy eating/nutrition; 
mental and emotional health; personal health and 
wellness; physical activity; safety and injury prevention; 
violence and bullying prevention; and comprehensive 
sexual health education that is LGBTQ-inclusive 
d. Medically accurate and age and developmentally-
appropriate 
e. Culturally and linguistically sustaining, including but 
not limited to race, gender, sexual orientation, and 
cultural identity 
f. Modified as needed for students with disabilities and 
students who are English Learners 
g.  
F. District endorsed high quality instructional materials 
include the following curricula: CATCH K-8 HE Journeys, 
Goodheart-Wilcox Grades 6-12 Essential Health Skills and the 
PreK-Grade 12 Rights, Respect, Responsibility curriculum.  
G. Student assessments in HE must include graded 
competency (i.e. knowledge, skills, practice) and 
participation assessments that are reflected on all students’ 
report cards. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 8 of 11 
 
 
 
H. Implemented in safe and supportive learning environments 
in which all students feel acknowledged, respected,  and 
valued. 
I. Schools should include cross-curricular, interdepartmental 
collaborations to enhance the value and meaning of health 
education programming, including opportunities for 
students to think critically, globally, and inclusively to 
develop health literacy to enhance health equity. 
a. For example, the school recognizes World Health Day 
by organizing a student-led Wellness Day. In 
preparation, health education classes explore the social 
determinants of health and identify Boston-based 
community health resources to enhance personal, 
family, and community well-being. Meanwhile, in social 
studies, students research global health issues and 
create maps or infographics to illustrate how different 
regions are impacted by various health challenges, as 
well as the role of international organizations in 
addressing these issues. In math, students analyze and 
compare data from the National YRBS and the Boston 
YRBS creating graphs, and interpreting trends using a 
strengths-based approach. In computer science, 
students design a simple app or website to promote 
healthy habits, such as a sleep tracker, a nutrition diary, 
or a mental health check-in tool. This interdisciplinary 
approach encourages and motivates healthy behaviors 
by focusing on positive outcomes. 
J. Professional development is an essential component of 
effective policy implementation. Therefore, HE teachers will 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 9 of 11 
 
 
 
attend relevant professional development opportunities.  
a. Schools will support and encourage school personnel 
in their professional development. 
b. Teachers are expected to stay current in the fields of 
health and health education through the review, 
analysis, and implementation (when appropriate) of 
national, state, and local health policies, procedures 
and standards, research in best practice, guidelines 
from international, national, and state organizations, 
etc. 
K. Schools should monitor (or assign another individual to 
monitor) relevant student and community information that 
can assist in identifying priority areas for health education. 
This should include, but not be limited to, district- level 
Youth Risk Behavior Survey data, School Health Profiles 
data, school-level Health Services Data, and community 
public health trends. Data should be used to review and 
modify health education programming in order to ensure 
that it is meeting the needs of the students.  
L. Schools are required by the state to notify 
parents/guardians about any curriculum that primarily 
involves human sexual education or human sexuality issues, 
and permit parents/guardians to exempt their children 
without penalty from any portion of that curriculum (see 
Superintendent Circular HWD-05: Human Sexual Education 
Education - Parent Notification). Schools will engage 
families in their child’s health education by providing access 
to curricular materials and health-related information. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 10 of 11 
 
 
 
Schools will also encourage students to actively engage 
parents/caregivers and other family members in promoting 
healthy behaviors. 
M. Should schools decide to utilize community partners to 
support their health education program, they will refer to 
PartnerBPS and consult with the Office of Health and 
Wellness to identify the most appropriate community 
partners to meet their needs. Community partners can 
provide an important aspect of quality health education and 
can meaningfully support and enhance programming in 
BPS. If a school is using a community partner and/or 
supplementary materials and curriculum to teach sexual 
health education, the school must consult the Office of 
Health and Wellness for vetting and recommendations.  
N. The Office of Health and Wellness leads health education for 
the district and will support schools by: 
a. Vetting health education curriculum, materials, and 
resources 
b. Providing curriculum training and materials, 
professional development, instructional coaching, and 
technical assistance 
c. Maintaining and enhancing the BPS health education 
digital learning library 
d. Vetting and managing partnerships to ensure 
equitable support of HE education across the district 
e. Collaborating to offer family health education 
informational workshops and events 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 11 of 11 
 
 
 
f. Coordinate with other central office department to 
develop health promotions and family events on 
specific health topics when applicable and align with 
tier II and tier III services and programs provided by 
those departments 
 
We recognize that effectively implementing a comprehensive 
skills-based health education program can be challenging. The 
Office of Health and Wellness is committed to providing training, 
support, and resources to schools and school personnel to help in 
the implementation of this policy. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director of Health & Wellness 
Department: 
Health & Wellness 
Mailing 
Address: 
370 Columbia Rd, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-8709 
Email: 
healthandwellness@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
HWD-04  
Version 01 
 
 
 
HEALTHY SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
BACKGROUND 
Approximately 20% of Americans go to school every day, with 
many students, teachers, staff, faculty, and administrators in 
aging facilities with deteriorating conditions. Meanwhile, studies 
have shown that the condition and health of the school building 
and grounds directly impacts the productivity and health of its 
occupants. High-performance green schools with healthy indoor 
air quality, acoustical controls, revitalized schoolyards, and 
daylight produce healthier, higher-performing students. A robust 
amount of literature is available for identifying best practices, 
guidelines, and recommendations for achieving healthy school 
environments. — from the Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, to the Environmental Protection Agency, to the 
American Federation of Teachers Union.  
In addition, the Center for Disease Controls (CDC) Whole School, 
Whole Community, Whole Child (WSCC) model states a healthy 
and safe physical school environment promotes learning by 
ensuring the health and safety of students and staff. 
Asthma is one of the leading causes of school absenteeism, and 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-04 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 
 
children with asthma are especially vulnerable in buildings that 
have evidence of environmental hazards that affect indoor air 
quality. The Federal National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institutes 
evidence-based guidelines for effective asthma management 
recommends reducing exposure to indoor environmental 
asthma triggers such as mold, dust mites, pests, pesticides, 
hazardous cleaners, and disinfectants, and exposure to 
environmental tobacco smoke in indoor environments.    
In partnership with the Boston Healthy Homes and Schools 
Collaborative (BHHSC) and the Healthy School Environment 
Taskforce, Boston Public Schools has implemented many of 
these evidence-based guidelines through district policies and 
programs (see below). As a result of the revised District Wellness 
Policy, school-based Wellness Councils, which are focused on 
improving health and wellness of students and staff, will be more 
closely involved in maintaining the healthiest level of indoor air 
quality and environmental health of their school and school 
grounds by working with Facilities Management, outside 
partners, and the school community.  
Considering that Boston Public Schools is the oldest school 
district in the country and home to existing buildings of all ages, 
it is critical that sustained resources, innovative programs, and an 
ongoing focus be dedicated to designing, upgrading, and 
maintaining our school buildings and grounds to fulfill whole-
school health and wellness goals.  
POLICY 
The Boston Public Schools recognizes that healthy physical 
environments are critical to the prevention of asthma and other 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-04 
Page 3 of 8 
 
 
 
chronic and infectious diseases that impact learning. The Boston 
Public Schools is committed to providing high-performing school 
buildings and grounds that are clean, in good repair, have 
healthy indoor air quality and water quality, sanitary and 
accessible bathrooms, and use resources efficiently. BPS strives 
to provide adequate facilities for physical activity that are 
accessible and culturally inclusive learning environments that 
positively impact the productivity, health, and wellness of all 
students and staff. To address environmental risk factors for 
chronic and infectious diseases, each school will receive an 
Annual Environmental Audit to evaluate health and safety 
conditions such as leaks, mold, pests, chemical storage, and 
cleanliness. The district shall maintain a Healthy Schools 
Taskforce (HST) to promote and raise awareness of the health of 
the built environment and ensure continuous improvement of 
BPS healthy school environment policies and programs.   
District departments and all schools, through an Environmental 
Committee or school-based Wellness Council, will comply with 
existing federal and state regulations, city ordinances, and 
District policies related to promoting and managing healthy 
school environments, including but not limited to:  
• Indoor air quality 
• Green cleaners  
• Integrated pest management 
• Trash and recycling 
• Infection prevention & control 
• Tobacco-free environmental policy 
• Environmental inspection/audit 
• Student safety/health in school shops 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-04 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 
 
• BPS water policy 
• Laboratories and chemical Inventory “Right to Know” law 
• Idling of buses and other motor vehicles on school property 
Schools will regularly assess the quality and quantity of BPS 
facilities for active transportation, physical activity, and physical 
education, including schoolyards, and report maintenance needs 
for these facilities. 
IMPLEMENTATION, MONITORING & EVALUATION GUIDELINES 
The Boston Public Schools and the Boston Public Health 
Commission must conduct annual Environmental 
Inspection/Audits (audit) to evaluate the health and safety 
conditions of each school building and school grounds. The 
Facilities Management Department, in partnership with school 
leadership, will take action to mitigate critical issues such as 
unhealthy indoor air quality, signs of pests, leaks, clutter, mold, 
unsatisfactory chemical management, and critical health and 
safety repairs. In addition, the audit results, along with best 
practices in the Healthy School Environment Resource Toolkit, 
shall be used by school principals/heads of school and school-
based Wellness Councils to develop annual environmental health 
priorities and goals as part of the school’s Wellness Action Plan. 
District departments and all schools, through an Environmental 
Committee or school-based Wellness Council, shall comply with 
existing city ordinances and District policies related to promoting 
and managing healthy school environments. Examples of 
relevant and existing healthy school environment policies, for 
which school-based Wellness Councils and school staff must 
comply, are referenced below:  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-04 
Page 5 of 8 
 
 
 
Massachusetts Legislation 
o MGL c. 90, s. 16B Idling of a motor vehicle engine on 
school property 
District Circulars 
o BPS Water Access Policy and FMT- 20 Drinking Water 
Access Circular  
o FMT-07: Chemical Inventory “Right to Know” Law 
o FMT-08: BPS Recycling & Zero Waste Policy 
o FMT-10: Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
o FMT-11: Green Cleaners Policy 
o FMT-13: Respiratory Protection Program 
o FMT-14 Hearing Conservation Program 
o FMT-15: Annual Environmental Inspection/Audit 
Program Conducted by Boston Public Schools/Boston 
Public Health Commission (City Ordinance 7.12.1-4) 
o FMT-17 Volunteer Projects 
o FMT-19 Cleaning and Disinfecting Body Fluid Spills 
o FMT-18: Science Safety in Laboratories and Classrooms 
o FSE-06: Student Safety / Health in School Shops, 
Laboratories and Classrooms 
o HWD-04: Healthy School Environments Policy 
o HWD-06: Tobacco-Free Environment Policy 
o SHS-04: Infection Prevention and Control in School 
Settings 
o SHS-20: Asthma in Schools 
BPS Facilities Department & Boston Public Health 
Commission 
Boston Public Schools will ensure all schools comply 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-04 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 
 
with healthy school environment policies. 
The Facilities Management Department and the 
Boston Public Health Commission will comply with City 
Ordinance (Boston, MA Ordinances, ch. 10 §§ 7-14.1-14.4 
(1996)) by conducting annual environmental 
inspection/audits of each school. They will 
communicate a school’s results to each school leader, 
and publish all results on the BPS website, available for 
review by the public. 
Upon completion of the audit, Facilities Management 
will immediately address critical health and safety 
deficiencies by filing a work order with the appropriate 
division, and they will incorporate other needed work 
at the school sites into the annual budgeting process.  
On an ongoing basis, Facilities Management will 
provide technical assistance to principals/heads of 
school on environmental problems and other building-
related issues. 
School leadership and school-based Wellness Councils  
School administration and staff must actively 
participate in ensuring the school is following district 
policies and proactively manage environmental health 
issues for the sake of their students and staff. 
School principals/heads of school will be responsible for 
reviewing their school’s annual Environmental 
Audit/Inspection results and other related building 
condition resources to develop environmental health 
priorities for the school. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-04 
Page 7 of 8 
 
 
 
Administrators will engage in a collaborative planning effort 
with their school-based Environmental Committee or 
Wellness Council to finalize annual environmental health 
priorities, goals, action steps, and evaluation efforts. 
The Health and Wellness Department, in partnership with 
the Facilities Management Department, will annually assess 
all schools' Wellness Action Plans to ensure school leaders 
and school-based Wellness Councils are taking active steps 
to improve the health and cleanliness of their school 
building environment. 
Wellness Councils will track the progress of improved school 
conditions and evaluate annually what efforts worked best. 
Wellness Champions will participate in their school Wellness 
Councils. 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-04 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director of Health & 
Wellness 
Department: 
Office of Health & Wellness 
Mailing Address: 
370 Columbia Rd., Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9698 
Fax: 
617-635-1502 
Email: 
healthandwellness@bostonpublicschools.or
g    
 
 
Owner: 
Sustainability, Energy, and Environment 
Program Director 
Department: 
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 
1216 Dorchester Ave., Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9576 
Fax: 
617-635-9306 
Email: 
Operations-Department- 
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
  
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
TRN-03 
Version 01 
 
FIELD TRIP TRANSPORTATION 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
This circular outlines the steps that must be followed when 
transporting students to field trips where BPS transportation or 
an approved outside supplier is used. Additionally, this circular 
outline general rules regarding transporting students in the 
Boston Public Schools with other approved transportation 
suppliers. 
School buses or approved transportation suppliers’ 
vehicles should be used to transport students to and 
from field trips. Privately owned vehicles from non-
approved suppliers or leased vans are not to be 
utilized to transport students to and from field trips, 
except in the case of a genuine emergency. Staff who 
utilize their own vehicles risk being legally liable if 
students are injured while riding in their automobiles. 
 
Transdev is the supplier currently under contract with the Boston 
Public Schools (BPS) to provide transportation services on BPS 
yellow school buses, including field trips. All field trip 
transportation must utilize BPS school buses, unless the request 
cannot be accommodated based on capacity limitations, or an 
approved transportation supplier. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-03 
Page 2 of 12 
 
Arrangements with other suppliers are subject to the designation 
of that supplier as approved by Nate Kuder, the Chief Financial 
Officer, and may be made by individual schools/departments 
subject to purchasing regulations.  The approved supplier list can 
be found at the end of this circular. 
Staff should be aware of their responsibility to consult with and 
obtain the approval of their respective school leader or 
department head, using school/BPS letterhead, to make 
agreements or exchange money with parents, outside 
transportation companies, travel agencies, etc.  
When requesting buses for field trips, school leaders should be 
aware that BPS has the greatest bus availability between 9:30 
a.m. and 12:30 p.m. However, we encourage and welcome schools 
to submit all of their field trip requests as outlined in this circular. 
In the event that a request cannot be met, school leaders should 
explore the opportunity to order buses from approved suppliers 
who are not restricted to the use of the BPS school bus fleet. A 
list of approved suppliers is attached at the end of this circular. If 
the Transportation Department is unable to provide service at 
the time requested, Transportation will aim to provide notice to 
the school leader via email at least one week in advance of the 
requested trip date. The Transportation Department does not 
recommend particular suppliers for field trips and does 
recommend the use of our primary supplier, Transdev, whenever 
possible. 
 
All field trips must be budgeted on account 52811, regardless of 
the supplier. If you do not have a field trip account (account 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-03 
Page 3 of 12 
 
52811), you must submit a budget transfer within your 
organization code to create the appropriate budget line. 
If students in 7th through 12th grade will be utilizing the MBTA 
for a field trip, schools can email schooltrips@mbta.com and/or 
submit a request through the School Field Trip Submission Form 
should they need to acquire MBTA passes for students who do 
not already have a pass because they live within the school’s walk 
zone. 
 
Please refer to the following circulars for guidelines and 
procedures for the planning and implementation of BPS field 
trips: CAO-22 General Guidelines for All Field Trips, CAO-23 Day 
Field Trip Guidelines, CAO-24 Overnight Field Trips Guidelines, 
and CAO-25 International Field Trip Guidelines. 
 
I. 
FIELD TRIP TRANSPORTATION CHECKLIST - BPS Yellow Bus 
Fleet 
 
1. Obtain the necessary signatures from BPS authorities at 
least four (4) weeks prior to any 
planned field trip, as outlined in the field trips circulars 
referenced above.  
 
2. Submit your request via the Supplemental Transportation 
Request Form to arrange for booking yellow bus 
transportation with Transdev at least two (2) weeks in 
advance of the field trip. If you would prefer to use a 
transportation supplier from the attached approved 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-03 
Page 4 of 12 
 
transportation suppliers list, please use the requisition 
process in the BAIS FN system.  
 
3. Once your field trip request through BPS has been 
processed, you will receive an invoice from the BPS DOT 
Supplemental Transportation Manager, Kyle Lewis. This 
invoice will detail payment options. Please continue reading 
for general payment information. 
 
4. Field trip transportation requests funded through external 
grants must include the appropriate grant ID and program 
codes. In the event that funds for an external grant have not 
been activated in BAIS FN, you will need to use general 
funds (fund 100) for the trip. After the grant funds are loaded 
into BAIS FN, please email Kyle Lewis, the Supplemental 
Transportation Manager, requesting that they submit an 
expenditure transfer on your behalf to move field trip 
expenses from fund 100 to your grant. 
i. 
As a reminder, all schools planning to have field 
trips should budget for them using account code 
52811 
b. Please note that in cases where a school has indicated 
that they would like to use ESSER or Title I META, the 
school will need to provide confirmation that this 
spending has been approved by their ESSER Liaison or 
the district’s Title I Coordinator, Imani Penn 
(ipenn@bostonpublicschools.org). 
 
5. The Transportation Department will only order those field 
trips utilizing the district’s yellow bus fleet, managed by 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-03 
Page 5 of 12 
 
Transdev. If you will be using a different vendor for your field 
trip, please see section II. 
6. Payments should be made through a budget transfer or 
check. Field trip transportation will not be scheduled unless 
the transfer is submitted, or the check is mailed at least five 
(5) school days prior to the date of the trip.  
a. Fund 100/general funds: Transfers should be made to 
the following chartfield in the BPS Transportation 
budget: 
i. 
Org: 101081 
ii. 
Fund: 100 
iii. 
Account: 52805 
iv. 
Program: 2695 
v. 
Class: 0000 
vi. 
Bud Ref/Year: 2024 
b. Fund 200/grants: BPS Transportation will submit an 
expenditure transfer to the Grants Office on your 
behalf. Please confirm the necessary approvals and the 
budget line you would like to use to fund your field trip 
via email to the Supplemental Transportation Manager, 
Kyle Lewis, at least five (5) days before your scheduled 
field trip 
c. Check: Please confirm the check was mailed via email 
to the Supplemental Transportation Manager, Kyle 
Lewis, at least five (5) school days prior to the planned 
trip. Checks should be made out to the Boston Public 
Schools Transportation Department and mailed to:  
Kyle Lewis, BPS Transportation Department  
Bruce C. Bolling Building 
2300 Washington Street 
Roxbury, MA 02119 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-03 
Page 6 of 12 
 
Note: Full bus capacity for the BPS yellow bus fleet is 
approximately seventy (70) elementary school students, sixty (60) 
middle school students and forty-five (45) adults/high school 
students. An adult MUST ride with students on any and all field 
trips on BPS buses. 
 
7. Final confirmation for any transportation services provided 
by Transdev should be made three (3) school days before 
the scheduled trip by contacting Kyle Lewis, the 
Supplemental Transportation Manager at Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org or 617-635-
9418. Notice of any changes or canceled trips must be 
provided to the Transportation Department at least three (3) 
school days in advance, except in case of emergency. 
 
The bus price schedule for the BPS fleet (Transdev) is as follows: 
Inside Route 128  
Discounted Rate:  
 
$132.50 each way if your trip is between 9:30 a.m. 
and 12:30 p.m. (Buses must be back to your school 
by 12:30 p.m., or the trip will be billed at the regular 
rate). 
 
Regular Rate:  
  
$190.00 each way or $380.00 for a round trip 
Outside Route 128 Regular Rate: 
$540.00 (in-state), $1,050.00 (out-of-state) 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-03 
Page 7 of 12 
 
Layover Charges 
In some cases, if a school requires the bus to stay 
on-site, it will cost $42.00 per hour for layover time. 
 
 
II. FIELD TRIP TRANSPORTATION CHECKLIST - Approved Private 
Transportation Supplier 
1. Obtain the necessary signatures from BPS authorities at 
least four (4) weeks prior to any planned field trip, as 
outlined in the field trips circulars referenced above. A 
Request for Waiver form (attached) must be used if 
requesting the use of suppliers not under contract with the 
Boston Public Schools; supplier options are limited to those 
on the attached Approved Field Trip Transportation 
Suppliers list. Assurances are required for the use of all non-
BPS carriers, as noted on the waiver form. This form must be 
attached to the field trip request form appropriate for the 
type of trip you are conducting (based on the Field Trips 
circulars referred to above) and forwarded to the Office of 
the Chief Financial Officer (do not send to theTransportation 
Department).  
2. All trips booked with approved private transportation 
suppliers (this does not include Transdev) must be organized 
utilizing the requisition procedures in PeopleSoft BAIS FN. 
Please complete the requisition for an approved 
transportation supplier at least ten (10) school days prior to 
the date of the trip to ensure that a purchase order (PO) can 
be dispatched to the bus company ahead of the field trip.  
3. Please note that requisitions with incorrect account codes 
cannot be processed, therefore you will need to confirm that 
funds for your field trip are in account 52811. If you do not 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-03 
Page 8 of 12 
 
have a field trip account in your budget (account 52811), you 
must submit a budget transfer within your organization 
code to create the appropriate budget line. Transportation 
requests funded through external grants must include the 
appropriate grant ID and expense codes. 
4. The details of the requested field trip must be entered on 
the requisition in the header details panel using the 
comment section. The details must include the following 
information: 
a. Contact person 
b. Phone number  
c. Email 
d. Pick-up location 
e. Site to be visited 
f. Address 
g. Site telephone number  
h. Site contact person  
i. Purpose of trip  
j. Date of trip 
k. Departure time 
l. Time back at school 
m. Number of students 
n. Number of buses needed 
o. Adults riding along   
5. For requisitions to post, a valid budget check must be done. 
Requisitions that do not pass a budget check will not be 
processed. It is the responsibility of the school ordering the 
trip to ensure that all budget checks have passed and that a 
purchase order has been dispatched. Refer to the BAIS FN 
PeopleSoft training material titled “Creating a Requisition” if 
you need assistance in this procedure. 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-03 
Page 9 of 12 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Transportation 
Department: 
Transportation 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9643  
Fax: 
617-635-9541 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-03 
Page 10 of 12 
 
REQUEST FOR WAIVER FORM TO USE SCHOOL BUS SUPPLIERS  
NOT CURRENTLY APPROVED AND UNDER CONTRACT 
 
This form must be used when utilizing suppliers that are not already under 
contract with the Boston Public Schools. 
 
 
I am hereby requesting a waiver to use non-Boston Public School 
transportation for the field trip 
requested on the attached Field Trip Request Form (based on the Field Trips 
circulars referenced above). 
 
SCHOOL:  
 
DATE OF TRIP:  
 
DESTINATION:  
 
BUS COMPANY (CARRIER):  
 
RENTAL COMPANY CARRIER: 
 
The building administrator must check each of the following to indicate 
documentation on file in the school providing assurances noted: 
 
● Three informal quotes received from potential non-BPS transportation 
carriers. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-03 
Page 11 of 12 
 
● Carrier selected is licensed by the Commonwealth to provide charter 
service. 
● Carrier drivers are properly licensed to provide charter service. 
● Carrier drivers are all CORI & SORI checked. 
● Carrier maintains a minimum bodily liability insurance policy of $1 
million per occurrence. 
 
 
APPROVALS:  
 
 
___________________________________________  
________________________       
Signature of Principal/Head of School 
 
 
      
Date  
 
 
___________________________________________  
________________________  
School Superintendent   
 
 
     Date  
 
 
___________________________________________  
________________________  
Chief Financial Officer                                          
 
Date  
 
THIS FORM SHOULD BE SUBMITTED TO THE PARTIES LISTED ABOVE. 
ALLOW AT LEAST TEN SCHOOL DAYS FOR APPROVAL 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-03 
Page 12 of 12 
 
APPROVED FIELD TRIP TRANSPORTATION SUPPLIERS 
Supplier Name 
Supplier ID 
Phone 
Number 
Address 
Adams Motor 
Transportation Inc.  
0000003388 
617-296-1930 
631 Walk Hill Street, 
Mattapan, MA  02126 
Chantals, Inc. 
0000053323 
617-293-0754 35 Nikisch Avenue, Boston, 
MA  02131 
Crystal Transport, 
Inc. 
0000001421 
617-787-1544 
1616 Hyde Park Ave, 
Boston, MA 02136 
Dollar Ride ECO 
Ride LLC/ ECO 
Ride Group 
Transportation 
0000071239 
 
62 Huntington Street, 
Brockton, MA 02301 
Eastern Bus 
Company 
0000000396 
617-628-6868 PO Box 514, Somerville, MA  
02143 
Local Motion, Inc. 
0000022242 
781-535-6344 66B Rocsam Park Road, 
Braintree, MA  02184 
People Care-iers, 
Inc. 
0000003949 
617-361-1515 
270 Islington Road, 
Newton, MA  02466 
Tony’s 
Transportation, 
Inc. 
0000055218 
617-719-3777 
66 Glendale Street, PO Box 
220815, Boston, MA 02125 
Vocell Bus 
Company, Inc. 
0000000385 
781-393-0220 378 Commercial Street, 
Malden, MA  02148 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
TRN-02 
Version 01 
 
 
 
STUDENT TRANSPORTATION SAFETY & DISCIPLINE 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
HEAD OF SCHOOL/PRINCIPAL EXPECTATIONS 
The school bus is considered an "extension of the classroom" in 
terms of expected student behavior. The school is responsible for 
working with students and parents/guardians to address 
behaviors of students and parents/guardians that take place on 
or are related to bus service that are not consistent with school 
and district policies. This policy reinforces the Standards of 
Behavior for Boston Public School students. The head of 
school/principal is responsible for implementing the Code of 
Conduct and Standards of Behavior as they apply to students and 
parents/guardians while utilizing school transportation and the 
MBTA. The head of school/principal will also communicate 
student/parent/guardian obligations at the start of the school 
year via student presentations and notification to 
parents/guardians through School-Based Rules. Please note that 
the Code of Conduct includes procedures for the denial of 
transportation.  
The head of school/principal will apply all approved Boston Public 
Schools policies and procedures to matters of regular 
transportation service and field trips, athletics, and late bus runs. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
 
INCIDENT REPORTING AND RESPONSE 
The head of school/principal will report all incidents, maintain all 
records, and take appropriate action as prescribed in applicable 
Superintendent's Circulars, including but not limited to any state 
or federal reporting (e.g., mandated reporting to DCF or the SSDR 
report for DESE, etc.). In the event of a school transportation 
incident resulting in student injury, the school administrator will 
contact the parent(s)/guardian(s) and provide appropriate 
information in accordance with Superintendent's Circular FSE-05, 
Medical Emergency Management. The head of school/principal 
will maintain copies of all incident reports filed by drivers and 
utilize reports for remedial actions.  
BPS school buses are equipped with two cameras. One camera 
faces out from the bus forward to record oncoming traffic. The 
second camera is focused inward on the bus from the front of the 
bus. Cameras do not record sound. Only in emergency situations 
(e.g. active missing student investigation) may camera footage 
be accessed in real time and only by Department of 
Transportation personnel. When an incident is reported, 
depending on the nature of the incident, a review of video 
footage of the reported incident may be requested by a school, a 
parent/guardian, or a member of the district transportation team. 
In most situations, student conduct investigations will rely on 
incident reports from students and adults on board the bus, 
rather than camera footage. Any requests for bus footage must 
run through the BPS Transportation Department. Cameras have 
limited video storage capacity that typically store 7 (seven) to 10 
(ten) days of footage, depending on bus usage. Cameras are not 
actively monitored. Neither BPS DOT nor the bus vendor will use 
cameras for any purpose other than investigating specific 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
 
allegations. 
When incidents occur that are related to bus transportation, BPS 
DOT can work with schools on implementing solutions to 
support successful student transportation on BPS buses. Some 
strategies that have been effective in the past include but are not 
limited to school-led mediations with parents/guardians, 
students, bus drivers, bus monitors, and school staff; school-led in 
depth training for drivers and/or monitors; school assigned bus 
seating plans; addition of a bus attendant by the school to the 
bus. In very limited circumstances, requiring approval of the 
Director of BPS DOT, a student, driver, or monitor may be 
reassigned. Such reassignment will be a last resort only after 
other strategies have been exhausted. This helps ensure that 
students are fully supported in learning how to successfully 
navigate yellow bus transportation. 
RELATIONSHIPS WITH DRIVERS & MONITORS AND MANAGING 
BUS ARRIVALS AND DISMISSALS 
The head of school/principal or their designee is responsible for 
monitoring transportation service and the performance of school 
bus drivers and monitors. This includes daily one-on-one contact 
by school staff with a driver upon their arrival and departure from 
a school. Heads of school/principals are advised and encouraged 
to make all efforts to maintain a positive relationship with all 
drivers and bus monitors and to also endeavor to work 
constructively with all BPS and Transdev staff with whom they 
come in contact throughout the school year. 
School administrative staff are responsible for managing safe and 
efficient bus arrival and dismissal processes. All buses assigned to 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
 
a school are together scheduled to be fully loaded or unloaded 
within a ten-minute window. To be on time for all subsequent 
trips, in the morning all buses must be unloaded and depart the 
school by the school’s bell time. In the afternoon, all buses 
assigned to a school must load and depart the school by 10 
minutes after the bell time.  
When arriving at schools, buses may not allow students to unload 
until a member of the school staff is present to meet students. 
This ensures that a school staff member is present to take 
responsibility for students before students exit the bus. Schools 
are responsible for maintaining up-to-date bus rosters and 
ensuring students are placed on their assigned bus during bus 
dismissal. BPS Transportation Department operations support is 
available to review bus loading and unloading procedures upon 
request. 
Heads of school/principals are encouraged to make time 
available to meet with drivers who wish to confer with them on a 
voluntary basis throughout the school year for the purpose of 
maintaining their transportation safety/discipline program. 
Heads of school/principals may provide drivers with a seating 
plan for each bus, but they should work constructively with 
drivers and monitors in the implementation of such a plan. If a 
seating plan is put in place, students should be instructed to 
remain in their assigned seats throughout the trip. 
The head of school/principal or their designee should regularly 
interview students to make assessments of the quality of 
transportation service and are also asked to monitor ridership 
and notify BPS Transportation if any bus assignments are not 
being utilized. Schools can provide student opt out information in 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
 
our Support Portal. This link provides a walkthrough. We ask 
schools to utilize our Support Portal to ensure accountability 
within our team and support our effort to reduce follow-up times. 
The head of school/principal or their designee may occasionally 
ride school buses for first-hand observation of operations, but 
notification to the Transportation Department must be made in 
advance to ensure that buses are within capacity requirements 
for ridership.  
Monitors assigned through the special education process are 
essential members of a student’s support team. Schools are 
responsible for training bus monitors on IEP required student 
specific supports.  Monitors must be included in students’ 
support teams for training on an ongoing basis to be prepared to 
best meet the needs of our students who ride the bus and to help 
ensure students can succeed in the least restrictive environment. 
Schools may contact the BPS DOT Monitors Unit to arrange 
meetings with monitors throughout the school year.  
Please remember that bus drivers and bus monitors are 
important members of our school community. When they are at 
your school, per district policy, they are permitted to use 
restroom facilities. Bus drivers and bus monitors are expected to 
present identification to enter any building. Just like for all other 
members of our school and district staff, please ensure that these 
team members have access to bathroom facilities in your 
building as needed. 
SAFETY EDUCATION AND EVACUATION DRILLS 
The head of school/principal will support all safety education 
efforts relative to transportation and initiate programs within the 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
 
first week of the school year and throughout the school year. 
School bus evacuation drills are to be conducted in accordance 
with M.G.L., Chapter 90, Section 9B, which mandates school bus 
evacuation instruction and drills. Evidence of completed 
instruction and drills must be kept on file by the head of 
school/principal. BPS Transportation, Transdev Safety, and BPS 
Safety Services personnel will assist school administrators in 
conducting bus evacuation drills as required by M.G.L. Chapter 
90, section 9B. 
ROLE OF THE BPS TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT 
• The Transportation Department acts as the liaison between 
the bus company, school personnel, parents/guardians, BPS 
Safety Services, and Boston Police Department. 
• The Transportation Department monitors contractual 
compliance by vendors relative to the employment of 
drivers and driver conduct. 
• The Transportation Department records all complaints 
regarding driver behavior and forwards them to the 
company for remedial action by the bus company. The 
Director of Transportation may, in extreme circumstances, 
order suspension or reassignment of drivers subject to 
consultation with the bus vendor and the collective 
bargaining agreement between drivers and bus company. 
• The Transportation Department completes bus routing and 
planning to create efficient bus schedules that minimize 
ride time for students and optimize deployment of drivers, 
monitors, and buses. Where necessary, the Transportation 
Department will revise routes or pick-up points to reduce 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
 
potential safety problems. 
• The Transportation Department provides parents/guardians 
with advice relative to procedures to assist in the resolution 
of transportation issues. 
• The Transportation Department notifies the head of 
school/principal of any school bus accident, including a list 
of the students onboard the bus and any other relevant 
information. In the event an accident occurs after school 
hours, the Transportation Department will attempt to notify 
the Head of School/Principal at home. 
• In the event of a school transportation accident or incident 
resulting in student injury, BPS Transportation implements 
the following procedures: 
o Ensures Transdev Safety staff has properly followed 
procedures and notified police or emergency medical 
services as necessary. 
o Notifies the school building administrator, principal 
leader, assistant superintendent of operations, and 
operational leader, relaying all available information. 
Building administrators are then responsible for 
notifying parents/guardians. 
• If the building administrator or other school-based staff is 
not available, BPS Transportation Department staff will 
notify parents/guardians or emergency contact person. 
ROLE OF THE BUS COMPANY – TRANSDEV TRANSPORTATION 
The bus company will comply with all requirements contained in 
its contract with the School Committee, its collective bargaining 
agreements with its staff, and all Massachusetts laws and 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
 
regulations as they pertain to school bus safety and reporting. 
The bus company will adhere to the Incident Response & Report 
Process as outlined below: 
1. The Transdev Safety Desk will log all calls and deployment 
requests sent into the Safety Desk by drivers or safety staff, 
BPS Transportation, or others and will submit those along 
with any incident reports generated after an incident. 
2. In an emergency, Transdev Safety Desk will call BPS or EMS 
and deploy Transdev road safety supervisors to all serious 
incidents and accidents. Transdev Safety Desk will notify 
BPS Transportation staff immediately upon learning of any 
serious incident and will continue to supply timely details 
from the scene as they become available. In the event of a 
school transportation incident resulting in student injury 
after normal operating hours, Transdev Safety Desk staff and 
BPS Transportation Call Center staff will assist school 
administrators in the parent/guardian notification process. 
3. Transdev drivers will provide as much specific information 
as possible over the radio to Safety Desk and in their written 
reports, mainly the names and student numbers of involved 
students. Drivers should also fill out incident reports and 
give copies to school administrators and their branch 
supervisors daily. All incident reports are logged on a 
computer database at the bus company.  
4. Transdev safety staff and BPS Transportation work together 
to communicate with heads of school/principals and police 
where necessary to assist in the resolution of incidents. 
Heads of school/principals are required to contact 
parents/guardians and discipline students when necessary.  


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
 
The bus company will instruct drivers to meet with heads of 
school/principals after the "dry runs" of bus routes before the 
opening of school. Heads of school/principals should be prepared 
to discuss their student transportation safety/discipline program 
with drivers at that time and throughout the year. Drivers may 
also be made available to meet with the head of school/principal 
on an ongoing basis. Arrangements for meetings can be made by 
contacting the BPS Transportation Department.  
Transdev road safety supervisors and driver trainers will inspect 
the safety and accessibility of pick-up and drop-off locations 
throughout the city as requested. 
 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Transportation 
Department: 
Transportation 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9643  
Fax: 
617-635-9541 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
OR 
Owner: 
Chief of Student Support 
Department: 
Student Support Office 
Mailing Address: 
213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000 
Fax: 
617-635-8006 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
TRN-01 
Version 01 
 
 
SCHEDULE OF SCHOOL HOURS  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
Attached is an alphabetical listing of opening and closing hours 
for each school for the school year. This listing includes an AM 
bus drop-off time for each school when staff must be available to 
accept students, an AM bell, a PM bell, and an early dismissal 
time and day of week. 
Please pay special attention to the AM and PM bell times for your 
school. No changes may be made to these schedules — including 
to early dismissals — without the written permission of the chief 
operating officer. All requests for changes to bell times for the 
subsequent school year must be made in writing to the chief 
operating officer before the end of October.  
Please note the following regarding any requested changes: 
● Any requested bell time changes must be for either 
7:30am, 8:30am, or 9:30am AM bell times in order to align 
with the District’s 3-tier bell schedule 
● No requested bell time changes for an 8:30am start can be 
accommodated at this time, as the transportation 
operation is at capacity during the 2nd tier. 
IMPORTANT NOTES ON TRANSPORTATION: 
● All BPS buses are scheduled to arrive at schools 15 minutes 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-01 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
before the scheduled AM bell time to give students time 
to settle in and have breakfast before instruction starts. 
Adequate staff assistance is needed to make sure buses 
are unloaded as they arrive, as efficiently and safely as 
possible, so that these buses can get to the next 
scheduled location on time. Buses are expected to depart 
the school for their next trip no more than 10 minutes after 
their arrival. In some cases, with agreement from the 
school, buses are scheduled to arrive more than 15 
minutes before the scheduled AM bell time 
● PM buses are scheduled to arrive at each schools’ PM bell 
time. Adequate staff assistance and the appropriate 
dismissal procedure are needed to make sure buses are 
loaded as they arrive. Buses are expected to depart 10 
minutes after the PM bell to get to their next scheduled 
location on time.  
● On the day before Thanksgiving and the last two days of 
school in June, all schools will dismiss pupils a uniform 
two (2) hours and thirty (30) minutes earlier than their full-
day PM bell time, unless operationally there is a need to 
modify dismissal.  The uniform two hour and thirty-minute 
early release will apply to all schools, regardless of any 
regularly scheduled early release or past practice. 
● Certain specialized programs/schools have hours that are 
subject to determination by the superintendent or 
designee.  
 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-01 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Executive Director of Transportation 
Department: 
Transportation 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9643  
Fax: 
617-635-9541 
Email: 
Operations-Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
ATTACHMENT: 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS SCHEDULE OF SCHOOL HOURS
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
SCP-01 
Version 01 
 
 
SCHOOL COMMUNITY PARTNERS 
 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
BPS deeply values the essential role that School-Community 
Partners play in our collective efforts to eliminate opportunity 
and achievement gaps. To advance our goals of providing BPS 
students and families equitable access to high-quality partner 
opportunities and create more coherence, alignment, and 
understanding of the complex and extensive partnership 
landscape, BPS requires the implementation of this PartnerBPS 
(www.partnerbps.org) Policy for all BPS schools and for all BPS 
School-Community Partners.  
POLICY STATEMENT  
Any School-Community Partner providing any services in any 
BPS school must register and update their information annually 
via the PartnerBPS Partnership Platform. BPS requires all School-
Community Partners to be fully registered and approved via the 
PartnerBPS platform before providing any services within any 
school.  
 
DEFINITION OF A SCHOOL-COMMUNITY PARTNER  
A School-Community Partner is an organization, group, or 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SCP-01 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
coalition that intentionally collaborates with the Boston Public 
Schools to provide ongoing, direct services to BPS students, staff, 
families, and/or other members of the school community. This 
broad definition encompasses a variety of groups, including 
community-based organizations, colleges and universities, 
businesses or corporations, hospitals, government agencies, 
cultural institutions, nonprofit or non-governmental 
organizations and faith-based organizations.  
 
IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES FOR SCHOOLS  
A. School principals/school leaders/heads of school and/or a 
school staff member designated by the principal/head of 
school must identify all School-Community Partners 
providing services within the school building at the start of 
each school year within the www.partnerBPS.org website. 
This can be an agreement, contract, or Scope of Work 
outlining services provided and expectations on both sides. 
If the partner is a paid partner, the school is responsible for 
entering the requisition before the partner begins providing 
services to the school and providing this requisition number 
to the partner. No Boston Public School employee, other 
than those listed below, is authorized to enter a contract 
with any vendor.  This includes, but is not limited to 
contracts, agreements, memorandums of understanding, 
grants, partnership agreements, or any other expenditure 
that binds the district to payment for services/goods.  This 
includes purchases for services or goods for under $10,000. 
B. If additional School-Community Partners begin work at the 
school site during the school year, the designated school 
staff must also ensure the partner is registered and all 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SCP-01 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
agreements entered www.partnerBPS.org before services 
can begin. 
C. The school designee must ensure that all current School-
Community Partners are registered on PartnerBPS by 
August 31st of the upcoming academic school year. 
D. School leader or designee will require all new partners 
brokered throughout the school year to register in 
PartnerBPS before beginning services at the school.  
E. School leaders or designee must review their PartnerBPS 
School Partnership profile annually to verify and rate the 
partnerships listed on their profile. Review, verification, and 
rating should be conducted by June 30, before the end of 
the school year.  
F. Schools should use PartnerBPS as a resource for accessing 
and brokering partner opportunities and helping students 
and families identify and access partner opportunities.  
 
IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES FOR SCHOOL-COMMUNITY 
PARTNERS 
All School-Community Partners must be fully registered and 
approved on PartnerBPS.org before providing any type of service 
in a BPS school.  
In order for School-Community Partners to be considered fully 
registered, they must complete three steps: organization 
registration, program registration, and partnership registration. 
Further instructions and tutorial information on registering for 
PartnerBPS can be found at https://partnerbps.org/help-school-
community-partners/.  
All registered School-Community Partners must update their 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SCP-01 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
PartnerBPS profile by September 30 before providing their 
services in schools. Updates should include registration of all 
school partnerships for the upcoming year, an update of current 
information in organization and program profiles, and 
completion of any questions that have been added by the 
School-Community Partnerships team.  
As part of this process, School-Community Partners should work 
with partner schools to establish a school-based partnership 
agreement which they should then upload onto PartnerBPS.org.  
In addition to the annual updates, School-Community Partners 
should regularly monitor their profiles and keep information up 
to date. At minimum, review and necessary revisions should be 
completed by November 1 and April 1 of each school year.  
All School-Community Partners are required to be aware of and 
follow the guidelines outlined within the Guide for School 
Community Partners.  
Appropriate and authorized BPS staff reserve the right to deny 
approval of partners if they do not meet basic safety or quality 
standards set forth by BPS, including those found within the 
Guide for School Community Partners. 
IMPLEMENTATION MONITORING & SUPPORT 
A. The Office of Family and Community Advancement’s 
Partnerships Team will approve and/or follow up with 
registering partners after registration completion. If 
additional information is required before registration 
approval can be granted, the Team will contact the 
administrator of the respective PartnerBPS account for 
more information.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SCP-01 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
B. The Partnerships Team will provide partners and schools 
with ongoing PartnerBPS technical assistance and support 
using the site. In addition, support resources are available 
online at https://partnerbps.org/help-school-community-
partners/.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Partnerships 
Department: Office of Family and Community Advancement 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
                                                                   Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
EQT-08 
Version 01 
 
 
 
EXPECTANT AND PARENTING STUDENTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
BACKGROUND 
Boston Public Schools aims to graduate all students from high 
school and prepare them for college and career success. For 
students who are expecting or raising children, it is especially 
crucial to maintain high expectations and intensive support for 
school completion, as pregnancy and parenthood are among the 
primary reasons many students drop out of school. As a school 
district, Boston Public Schools aims to prevent student 
pregnancy through comprehensive health education and access 
to sexual health services. Under the District Wellness Policy, 
schools must provide students with access to key resources and 
services that are developmentally appropriate, and support 
sexual and reproductive health in a safe and supportive 
environment. It is also essential to engage with students who are 
currently expectant or parenting to ensure a safe and supportive 
learning environment and to promote academic success. 
Moreover, we must ensure compliance with district policies that 
prohibit bias-based conduct consistent with federal Title IX law, 
which prohibits discrimination against students who are 
pregnant or parenting. 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 2 of 28 
 
 
 
DEFINITIONS 
Expectant: an individual, regardless of gender identity, who 
is either pregnant or the partner of someone who is 
pregnant. 
Parenting: an individual, regardless of gender identity, who 
is the parent of a child. 
Caregiver: an individual currently providing care for the 
student who has completed the notarized “Caregiver 
Authorization Affidavit” granting education decision-making 
rights. 
Emancipated minor: an individual under age 18 who is self-
supporting and independent of parental control, sometimes 
as a result of a court order terminating the rights and duties 
of the parent(s). Under Massachusetts law, a minor who is 
pregnant or parenting is not automatically emancipated; 
however, as provided for in the law, pregnant and parenting 
students can give independent consent for medical or 
dental care for themselves or their children, including for 
school-based medical services (see M.G.L. Ch. 112 § 12F). 
FERPA (Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act): a 
federal law that affords parents the right to have access to 
their children’s education records, the right to seek to have 
the records amended, and the right to have some control 
over the disclosure of personally identifiable information 
from the education records. When a student turns 18 years 
old or enters a postsecondary institution at any age, the 
rights under FERPA transfer from the parents to the 
student. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 3 of 28 
 
 
 
HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act): a federal law establishing national standards and 
requirements for electronic health care transactions and 
protecting the privacy and security of individually 
identifiable health information. This law applies to health 
care providers and ensures that they do not share medical 
information about their patients without the patients’ 
permission. 
Gender identity: A person's internal sense of being male, 
female, some combination of male and female, or neither 
male nor female. A person’s gender identity can be the 
same or different from their physiology or assigned sex at 
birth. 
Parent: a child’s mother or father or both or guardian, or a 
person or agency legally authorized by a court order to act 
on behalf of the child in place of or in conjunction with the 
mother, father, or guardian. 
POLICY 
Maintaining Confidentiality 
Expectant and parenting students have the right to choose how 
and when they seek services and support from school staff. 
School staff must adhere to all applicable laws and regulations on 
confidentiality for students, including the requirements stated in 
the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA). As 
provided for by this law, expectant and parenting students have 
the right to have their health and personal information kept 
confidential, including from other students and school staff who 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 4 of 28 
 
 
 
are not required to be kept informed, except in circumstances 
involving their physical safety.  
When a student informs a school staff member of their expectant 
or parenting status, the staff member must inform their head of 
school within a reasonable time period as appropriate. A 
reasonable time period should be determined by the immediacy 
of the student’s need for an adjusted attendance policy and 
academic supports; for expectant students, sufficient time should 
be allowed for medical and health decisions to be made before 
sharing the student’s expectant status with the head of school. 
The staff member who has been informed must make the 
expectant or parenting student aware of the need to inform the 
head of school. The staff member should discuss with the 
student and determine a reasonable time period in which to 
inform the head of school. Depending on the details of the 
situation, the student’s preferences regarding confidentiality, and 
the student’s needs, the head of school should then share this 
information with other staff on a limited, need-to-know basis. 
School staff must not force or coerce a student to inform their 
parents, or any other individual, of any pregnancy or parenting-
related information. School staff must not disclose information 
about a student’s expectant or parenting status to the student’s 
parents without permission from the student. If information 
about a student’s pregnancy is documented within the student 
record of a student under the age of 18, and parents make a 
request for the student record, FERPA would require the district 
to present parents with an opportunity to view the student 
record. Boston Public Schools encourages communication with 
and involvement of parents/guardians/caregivers regarding 
health services and student supports. School staff working with 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 5 of 28 
 
 
 
expectant or parenting students should encourage students to 
consider informing their parents/guardians/caregivers or other 
trusted family members about the pregnancy and decisions 
related to that pregnancy.  
Nothing in this policy must prevent the disclosure of information 
in certain limited circumstances: cases of suspected child abuse 
or neglect (in accordance with laws on mandated reporting of 
abuse), threats by a minor against themselves or others, or cases 
where there is a serious risk to a minor’s life or health. A student’s 
pregnancy does not in itself constitute a serious risk to a minor’s 
life or health, and therefore does not compel a staff member to 
file a 51A based solely on the student’s pregnancy, regardless of 
the student’s age. 
A student must give written consent to store data linking their 
name with academic information and their expectant or 
parenting status. Storing this data together will help to ensure 
that the student is receiving coordinated academic support. 
Before giving this written consent, students must be informed 
that, if they consent, information about their expectant or 
parenting status may be accessible to their parents as part of 
their full academic records. Any aggregated or trend data on 
expectant or parenting students should not include any 
identifying information. Qualified medical professionals within a 
school building may keep confidential medical records on 
pregnant students who have sought treatment.  
Ensuring a Safe and Supportive Learning Environment 
BPS Equity circulars protect the rights of students, including 
expectant and parenting students, to attend school in an 
environment free of bias-based conduct. Regardless of their 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 6 of 28 
 
 
 
sexual orientation, gender identity, relationship status, marital 
status, race, ethnicity, immigration status, Special Education or 
English learner status, or other identities, expectant and 
parenting students have the same right as any other students to 
attend district schools or programs. District staff must not 
engage in bias-based conduct toward any expectant or 
parenting student, or exclude expectant or parenting students 
from any school, program, class, or extracurricular activity on the 
basis of a student’s expectant or parenting status. School staff are 
encouraged to bring an anti-racist lens to ensuring that 
expectant and parenting students be respected, provided with all 
needed supports, and actively encouraged to achieve their 
academic goals. 
School personnel may require an expectant or parenting student 
to obtain the certification of a physician that the student is 
physically and emotionally able to continue participation in such 
programs or activities only if a certification is also required of all 
other students with physical or emotional conditions requiring 
the attention of a physician. 
All school staff must maintain and communicate high academic 
expectations for all students, regardless of expectant or 
parenting status. Bias-based counseling and the use of materials 
that treat students differently on the basis of sex, including 
expectant or parenting status, are prohibited. 
The Office of Equity and administrators at each school are 
responsible for monitoring compliance with the provisions of this 
circular. Individuals who feel that this circular may have been 
violated or that they have been subject to bias-based conduct 
may contact the BPS Office of Equity. Any school employee who 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 7 of 28 
 
 
 
becomes aware of bias-based conduct against an expectant or 
parenting student must report such conduct to the head of 
school and/or to the Office of Equity. 
Finally, to promote a safe and supportive school environment, 
teachers and school staff must be sensitive to the health needs of 
expectant and parenting students. For example, some pregnant 
students may benefit from bringing snacks to class, taking extra 
bathroom breaks, or leaving class shortly before dismissal to 
allow more time to pass between classes. Schools must also 
accommodate new mothers’ need to express breastmilk and 
work with students in partnership with the Office of Equity to 
identify a private, sanitary location for this purpose, along with 
appropriate storage space for nursing equipment. 
Promoting Academic Success 
Expectant and parenting students have the right to remain in 
their regular or current school program, subject to universal 
participation requirements for those programs. School programs 
include but are not limited to: honors programs; special 
education placements; specialized language programs; 
alternative programs; extracurricular, intramural, and 
interscholastic activities; and graduation programs or activities. 
Students may attend an alternative school or participate in an 
alternative program or activity for expectant or parenting 
students, but such enrollment or participation must be 
completely voluntary and never coerced. The alternative school, 
program, or activity must align with the Common Core State 
Standards and the Massachusetts Curriculum Frameworks. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 8 of 28 
 
 
 
Implementing Attendance Policies 
Absences for reasons of pregnancy and related medical 
conditions, including pregnancy-related illness or health 
conditions, the termination of pregnancy, childbirth, and 
recovery therefrom, must be considered excused absences. 
Students have the right to be reinstated at the same school with 
the same status as before the leave began after any pregnancy-
related medical leave and/or parental leave. 
Students who are parents are entitled to a fair and reasonable 
parental leave following the birth of a new child. Students who 
are parents are entitled to a minimum of eight weeks of parental 
leave for the purpose of giving birth, although a school may not 
require a student to remain out of school for a fixed period of 
time post-childbirth. The amount of parental leave for each 
expectant student shall be determined in consultation with the 
student, school staff, the student’s health care providers, and any 
other adults the student consents to include. School staff should 
encourage students to consider including their 
parents/guardians/caregivers in this conversation. 
Documentation from students’ licensed healthcare providers 
may be required for verification of pregnancy and related 
medical conditions only if it is also required for absences due to 
other medical conditions. 
Absences due to the illness or medical appointment during 
school hours of a student’s child shall also be considered excused 
absences. Parenting students shall not be required to provide 
documentation from a licensed healthcare provider to verify their 
children’s illnesses unless such documentation is also required 
for absences due to all students’ medical conditions. 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 9 of 28 
 
 
 
Schools must support the continuation of learning during 
excused absences and leave, as medically appropriate. Every 
reasonable effort must be made to provide school and home-
based independent study activities for students who are or will 
be absent for a significant period of time due to pregnancy-
related illnesses, childbirth, and recovery, and parental leave. 
Students who are pregnant or parenting must have access to 
homebound or hospital instructional services on the same basis 
as any other student who misses school for a temporary medical 
condition.  
Students with excused absences due to their expectant or 
parenting status must have the same opportunity to complete 
assignments and tests missed, or an equivalent of the work 
missed, that any other student would have after excused 
absences. Students must be given full credit upon satisfactory 
completion of that work.  
Using Liaisons to Share Information 
Heads of school that oversee any student in grades 6-12 must 
identify a school liaison for the Expectant and Parenting Students 
Policy to help share information among the school community. 
Schools must submit the name of this liaison to the Health and 
Wellness Office. The liaison may be a guidance counselor, school 
nurse, social worker, or other school staff member. Should the 
expectant and parenting student liaison step down, a 
replacement must be identified and reported to the Health and 
Wellness Office within 15 school days. 
Liaisons will work with the school leadership and the School 
Wellness Council to share this policy with staff, students, and 
families. All schools within the district that include any grades 6-


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 10 of 28 
 
 
 
12 must disseminate this policy among school staff and 
administration. The policy must also be shared with students and 
families within the first month of school, and it must be posted in 
the school nurse’s office throughout the school year. The school 
must make the policy publicly available in any school-based 
health centers or health resource centers. The name of the 
expectant and parenting student liaison as well as a copy of this 
policy must also be posted on the school website. 
Heads of school are ultimately responsible for the academic 
success of their students. Therefore, school leaders must 
intervene in cases where students’ needs are not being met, 
especially when the action or inaction of school staff is a 
contributing factor. 
The Office of Health and Wellness will coordinate training for 
liaisons. That office must supply district and community 
resources to liaisons. Liaisons must make this information 
available to students and staff as needed. 
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 11 of 28 
 
 
 
POLICY IMPLEMENTATION AND REVIEW 
Central offices and departments (e.g., Opportunity Youth, Health 
Services, Health & Wellness), in collaborations with school 
superintendents, will work with schools where there are multiple 
expectant and parenting students, where existing support 
systems may not be adequate to support their needs, to help 
establish a plan for providing more comprehensive systems of 
support. For example, this could include creating a school-based 
team to develop and implement individual student plans, hiring a 
part-time student liaison to work with expectant and parenting 
students, or bringing in external programs or resources to 
support students. In all cases, the plan must be approved by the 
head of school and must match available school resources 
(particularly staff and budget). 
This policy and its associated implementation procedures will be 
reviewed annually by the Office of Equity and the Office of Health 
and Wellness and updated as needed. 
IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES & PROCEDURES 
Rights of Expectant and Parenting Students 
Expectant and parenting students have the right to: 
1. Choose how and when they seek services and support from 
school staff. 
2. Choose when and how to inform 
parents/guardians/caregivers or other trusted family 
members of their pregnancy and decisions related to that 
pregnancy. 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 12 of 28 
 
 
 
3. Have information shared with school personnel on a need-
to-know basis only, unless the student provides written, 
informed consent. 
a. In particular, students must give written, informed 
consent before information on their expectant or 
parenting status is stored in school files alongside their 
academic information. 
4. Participate in school programs, activities, classes, or 
extracurricular activities and remain in their regular or 
current school program, subject to universal participation 
requirements. 
a. Enrollment by expectant or parenting students in any 
alternative program or activity must be completely 
voluntary. 
5. Have their absences excused when due to the illness or 
medical appointment of a child or their own pregnancy-
related reasons. 
6. Complete assignments and tests missed, or an equivalent of 
the work missed, after excused absences due to their 
expectant or parenting status and receive full credit upon 
satisfactory completion of that work. 
7. Participate in a conference with school staff and health care 
providers about the amount of parental leave they will take, 
and to choose which other adults (including 
parents/guardians/ caregivers or other trusted family 
members), if any, to include in that conference. 
a. Students are entitled to a minimum of eight weeks of 
parental leave. 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 13 of 28 
 
 
 
b. BPS employees may not require a student to remain 
out of school for a fixed period of time post-childbirth. 
8. Receive Home and Hospital Instruction services to continue 
learning and obtain instruction during excused absences 
and/or leave that total more than 14 days in a school year. 
a. Students must provide a qualified physician's 
statement to access Home and Hospital Instruction 
services. 
9. Be reinstated at the same school at the conclusion of 
pregnancy and/or parental leave with the same status as 
before the leave began. 
Protecting Student Confidentiality 
1. Boston Public Schools employees must adhere to all 
applicable laws and regulations on confidentiality for 
students, including the requirements stated in the Family 
Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA). 
a. Obtain written, informed consent from expectant or 
parenting students before storing data linking 
students’ names with academic information and 
expectant or parenting status.   
b. Before giving written consent, students must be 
informed that, if they consent, information about their 
expectant or parenting status will be entered into their 
educational records to ensure that students are 
receiving necessary supports, and educational records 
are accessible to their parents in accordance with 
FERPA. 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 14 of 28 
 
 
 
2. When a student informs a school staff member of their 
expectant or parenting status, the staff member must 
inform their head of school within a reasonable time period 
as appropriate in order to provide coordinated academic 
support and adjusted attendance policies.  
a. A reasonable time period should be determined by the 
immediacy of the student’s need for an adjusted 
attendance policy and academic supports, balanced 
with the time needed by an expectant student to make 
personal health decisions before the head of school is 
informed.  
b. The staff member should explain to the student the 
need to inform the head of school in order to make a 
coordinated plan for academic success. The staff 
member should discuss with the student what a 
reasonable time period would be for them so there is a 
shared understanding and accountability of the next 
steps.  
c. If the student is pregnant and needs more time and 
support to consider their options and connect with a 
medical provider, the staff and student should make a 
plan to check in regularly to ensure the student 
receives timely support. The staff member is not 
required to inform the head of school if the pregnancy 
is ended. 
d. Depending on the details of the situation, the student’s 
preferences regarding confidentiality, and the 
student’s needs, the head of school should then share 
this information with other staff on a limited, need-to-
know basis. The school nurse may be helpful if health 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 15 of 28 
 
 
 
care coordination with the student’s medical provider 
is needed. A school social worker may be helpful in 
connecting the student to other support services. The 
student should be consulted before sharing their 
status with other staff; this is essential to building trust, 
honoring student autonomy, and ensuring the student 
feels safe and supported. 
3. School staff members must not disclose a student’s 
expectant or parenting status to that student’s parents 
regardless of age without permission from the student. 
Additionally, staff members must not force or coerce 
students to inform their parents, or any other individual, of 
any pregnancy or parenting-related information.  
a. School staff working with expectant or parenting 
students should encourage them to consider informing 
their parents/guardians/caregivers or other trusted 
family members of the pregnancy and decisions 
related to that pregnancy. Having a support system 
where they live is very important during pregnancy 
and while parenting. However, to help the student 
make a support plan, the trusted staff should ask if the 
student believes that telling their family about the 
pregnancy will put the student in danger and should 
be aware of such dynamics in the student’s home life. 
A school social worker, a trained reproductive health 
counselor, or a similar support role may be best suited 
to help counsel a student in this matter. 
b. In accordance with Massachusetts General Law 
(Chapter 119, Section 51A), school staff are expected to 
disclose information on child abuse or neglect to the 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 16 of 28 
 
 
 
appropriate authorities. Mandated reporters must 
report if, when acting in their professional capacities, 
they have reasonable cause to believe that a child is 
suffering certain kinds of physical or emotional injury. 
The kinds of physical or emotional injuries that must be 
reported are those that are the result of (i) abuse 
inflicted upon the child which causes harm or 
substantial risk of harm to the child's health or welfare, 
including sexual abuse; (ii) neglect, including 
malnutrition; or (iii) physical dependence upon an 
addictive drug at birth. A student’s pregnancy does not 
in itself constitute a serious risk to a minor’s life or 
health and does not automatically require submitting a 
report. 
4. School staff members should reach out to the school policy 
liaison, a school administrator, or the Office of Equity to get 
support in understanding confidentiality procedures as 
needed.  
Ensuring a Safe, Supportive Learning Environment  
BPS employees must: 
1. Treat all students, including expectant and parenting 
students, with respect, recognizing that all students have 
the potential to succeed. 
2. Maintain and communicate high academic expectations for 
all students, regardless of expectant or parenting status. 
3. Recognize and address the ways multiple forms of bias, 
inducing racial bias, may impact an expectant or parenting 
student’s opportunities for academic success. 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 17 of 28 
 
 
 
4. Ensure that expectant and parenting students are not 
excluded from any school, program, class, or extracurricular 
activity on the basis of the student’s expectant or parenting 
status. 
a. Teachers and school staff are encouraged to be 
sensitive to the health needs of expectant and 
parenting students. For example, some pregnant 
students may benefit from bringing snacks to class, 
taking extra bathroom breaks, or leaving class shortly 
before dismissal to allow more time to pass between 
classes.  
b. Schools must also accommodate new mothers’ need to 
express breast milk. Contact the Office of Equity for 
assistance as needed. 
5. Any BPS employee, student, or family member who 
becomes aware of possible bias-based conduct against an 
expectant or parenting student should report such conduct 
to the head of school and/or to the BPS Office of Equity. 
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
1. School administrators are responsible for: 
a. Ensuring school staff’s compliance with the policy. 
i. Intervene in cases where students’ needs are not 
being met, especially when the action or inaction 
of school staff is a contributing factor. 
b. Identifying a school policy liaison: Schools with any 
grades 6-12 must identify an Expectant and Parenting 
Student Policy liaison to share information with school 
staff, students, and families.  


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 18 of 28 
 
 
 
i. School leaders must submit the name of the 
policy liaison to the assistant superintendent, 
Office of Health & Wellness, by the first day of 
school each year. See contact at the end of the 
circular. 
ii. If the school’s policy liaison steps down, the school 
leader must identify a replacement and report 
their name to the Assistant Superintendent, Office 
of Health & Wellness, within 15 school days. 
iii. Every school has a different structure for 
providing student support services; therefore, the 
school-based position of the liaison may differ 
among schools. It is usually best if the liaison is in 
regular contact with expectant and parenting 
students as part of their job, such as a guidance 
counselor or social worker. At the K-8 or middle 
school level, where there are generally fewer 
expectant or parenting students, it may be 
appropriate for a health teacher or other 
interested teacher to serve as liaison. School 
nurses may not be the ideal choice as a liaison 
since they may not be available to leave the 
nurse’s office during school hours to share 
information with other staff. 
c. Overseeing the policy liaison to ensure communication 
of the policy to all staff, students, and families. 
d. Working with the Office of Equity to accommodate 
new mothers’ need to express breast milk by 
identifying a private, sanitary location for this purpose, 
along with appropriate storage space for nursing 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 19 of 28 
 
 
 
equipment. Bathrooms are not appropriate facilities, 
even if private. To qualify, spaces should be “shielded 
from view and free from any intrusion.” For more 
guidelines, see the fact sheet on “Break Time for 
Nursing Mothers Under the FLSA,” available at 
http://www.dol.gov/whd/regs/compliance/whdfs73.htm 
e. Reporting any instances of possible bias-based 
conduct against an expectant or parenting student to 
the Office of Equity (phone: 617-635-9650 or email: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org)  
i. It is considered bias-based conduct to exclude an 
expectant or parenting student from any school, 
program, class, or extracurricular activity on the 
basis of a student’s expectant or parenting status.  
ii. Enrollment by expectant or parenting students in 
any alternative program or activity must be 
completely voluntary. 
2. School Expectant and Parenting Student Policy liaisons are 
responsible for: 
a. Completing the initial district training for policy liaisons 
within the first few months of school, and any refresher 
training as required. The training objectives are to 
increase knowledge about the policy and related laws 
and improve skills in supporting expectant and 
parenting students and communicating with the 
school community. 
b. Ensuring that the policy is shared with students, 
families, and school staff. 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 20 of 28 
 
 
 
i. Work with the school leadership and the school 
wellness council to share the policy with staff, 
students, and families, ensuring translation for 
students and families whose primary language is 
not English. 
ii. Make the policy and any appropriate resources 
available in the school nurse’s office and any 
school-based health centers or health resource 
centers. 
iii. Post the name of the policy liaison and a copy of 
the policy on the school website so any member 
of the school community can access it. 
c. Disseminating information about district and 
community resources. 
i. Inform administrators, staff, and students about 
the availability of resources for expectant and 
parenting students; see Office of Health & 
Wellness for resources. 
ii. Disseminate information about support resources 
to expectant and parenting students directly as 
appropriate or through other school staff 
members as needed; students are not required to 
meet with the liaison if they do not wish.  
d. Supporting all school staff in maintaining student 
confidentiality as required by this policy and the law. 
i. Liaisons do not need to be informed of the 
identity of any expectant and parenting student 
unless the student chooses to inform the liaison; 
information and resources can be shared through 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 21 of 28 
 
 
 
the school staff member with whom the student 
has confided. 
ii. Liaisons are not expected to be case managers or 
counselors for expectant or parenting students 
unless this is already part of their job 
requirements. 
3. School nurses are responsible for: 
a. Offering regular check-ins with expectant students to 
monitor their health and wellness during their 
pregnancy. The type and frequency of check-ins should 
be established based on the student’s wishes, needs, 
and determined in consultation with the student. 
i. Health services should be provided in a safe and 
supportive environment free from bias-based 
conduct towards expectant or parenting students. 
b. Maintaining confidential medical records on pregnant 
or parenting students who have sought treatment. 
School nurses must be particularly aware of their 
responsibilities under state and federal law and 
regulations, especially the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA). 
c. Partnering with the head of school and the Office of 
Equity to accommodate new mothers’ need to express 
breast milk by identifying a private, sanitary location for 
this purpose, along with appropriate storage space for 
nursing equipment. Bathrooms are not appropriate 
facilities, even if private. To qualify, spaces should be 
“shielded from view and free from any intrusion.” For 
more guidelines, see the fact sheet on “Break Time for 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 22 of 28 
 
 
 
Nursing Mothers Under the FLSA,” available at 
http://www.dol.gov/whd/regs/compliance/whdfs73.htm 
d. Helping to determine the amount of parental leave a 
student will take following the birth of a child in 
consultation with the student, school staff who are 
already aware of the student’s expectant status, the 
student’s health care providers, and any other adults 
the student consents to include. 
i. Students are entitled to a minimum of eight 
weeks of parental leave. 
ii. BPS employees may not require a student to 
remain out of school for a fixed period of time 
post-childbirth. 
e. Posting the policy in the school nurse’s office 
throughout the school year and making the policy 
publicly available in any school-based health centers or 
health resource centers. 
 
4. Guidance counselors are responsible for: 
a. Providing expectant and parenting students with 
academic support and guidance when requested. 
Students should be encouraged to seek support from 
school guidance counselors to make an academic plan, 
but students have a right to choose how and when 
they seek services and support from school staff.  
i. Work with expectant and parenting students to 
determine a school schedule that promotes on-
time arrival and regular attendance. For some 


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 23 of 28 
 
 
 
students, this may include flexible scheduling, 
independent study periods, or online courses 
(provided that online courses include sufficient 
opportunities for in-person interaction and 
support as needed). 
b. Obtaining written, informed consent from expectant or 
parenting students before storing data linking 
students’ names with academic information and 
expectant or parenting status. Before giving written 
consent, students must be informed that, if they 
consent, information about their expectant or 
parenting status will be entered to ensure that 
students are receiving necessary support, and then 
may be accessible to their parents as part of their full 
academic records. 
c. Ensure that any counseling or information provided to 
students is unimpeded by bias. 
d. Ensure that any student’s decision about whether to 
participate in alternative schools, programs, or 
activities for expectant or parenting students is 
completely voluntary if sharing information with 
students about those programs. 
e. If a school does not have a guidance counselor on staff, 
these responsibilities fall to the head of school. 
5. The student’s school leader or their designee is responsible 
to: 
a. Bring together the student, other school staff already 
aware of the student’s expectant or parenting status, 
the student’s health care providers, and any other 


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 24 of 28 
 
 
 
adults the student consents to include to determine 
the amount of parental leave for each expectant 
student. Encourage students to consider including 
their parents/guardians/caregivers in this conversation. 
i. Students are entitled to a minimum of eight 
weeks of parental leave. 
ii. BPS employees may not require a student to 
remain out of school for a fixed period of time 
post-childbirth. 
b. Ensure that students are reinstated at the conclusion 
of a pregnancy and/or parental leave with the same 
status as before the leave began. 
c. Support the continuation of learning during excused 
absences and leave, as medically appropriate, including 
by working with the student to arrange a temporary 
home or hospital instructional services through the 
BPS Opportunity Youth Department. 
d. Work with expectant and parenting students to 
determine a school schedule that promotes on-time 
arrival and regular attendance. Contact the Homeless 
Education Resource Network (HERN) to arrange 
transportation and promote school attendance among 
expectant or parenting students experiencing 
homelessness who are residing outside of the district. 
e. Ensure that absences are excused when they arise 
from pregnancy and related medical conditions, 
including pregnancy-related illness or health 
conditions, the termination of pregnancy, childbirth, 
and recovery therefrom. Documentation from 


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 25 of 28 
 
 
 
students’ licensed healthcare providers may be 
required for verification of pregnancy and related 
medical conditions only if it is also required for 
absences due to other medical conditions. 
f. Ensure that absences are considered excused when 
they are due to the illness or medical appointment 
during school hours of a child of a student. 
6. Central Office Staff 
a. Office of Health and Wellness is responsible for: 
i. Tracking names of school-based policy liaisons  
ii. Coordinating initial and any needed refresher 
training resources for policy liaisons. The training 
will include best practices on disseminating 
information about the expectant and parenting 
students policy, on finding and distributing 
resources to students in a culturally responsive 
way, and on expectations for data collection and 
confidentiality. 
iii. Maintaining up-to-date district and community 
resources for supporting expectant and parenting 
students and sharing these resources with 
liaisons. 
b. Office of Equity is responsible for:  
i. Monitoring compliance with this policy, including 
responding to reports of possible bias-based 
conduct. 
ii. Ensuring communication of the policy at every 
level of staff within the district and 


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 26 of 28 
 
 
 
communicating the policy yearly to families 
through the BPS Guidebook. 
iii. Reviewing the policy and its associated 
implementation procedures annually and 
updating as needed in collaboration with the 
Office of Health and Wellness and other central 
office stakeholders identified in this policy. 
iv. Sharing the expectant and parenting students 
policy and policy updates with the Boston 
Student Advisory Council and other student 
groups. 
c. The Department of School Health Services is 
responsible for: 
i.  Providing training and guidance to school nurses 
on best practices for working with expectant and 
parenting students, including how to ensure 
confidentiality in accordance with this policy and 
the law and providing culturally responsive 
services. 
d. Office of Opportunity Youth is responsible for:  
i. Working with schools to help support the 
continuation of learning during excused absences 
and leave through the Home and Hospital 
Instruction Program.  
ii. Through supervisors of attendance, responding to 
inquiries about attendance policies or reporting, 
including policies on excused absences for 
expectant and parenting students. 


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 27 of 28 
 
 
 
iii. Through the Homeless Education Resource 
Network (HERN), working with schools to arrange 
transportation and promote school attendance 
among expectant or parenting students 
experiencing homelessness who are residing 
outside of the district. 
e. Central office departments tasked with student 
support services, such as Guidance and Social Work, 
are responsible for: 
i.  Supporting the communication of this policy to 
the school-based staff they support and 
supporting professional development to ensure 
staff is trained and have the resources to support 
expectant and parenting students.  
ii. Identifying schools with large numbers of 
expectant and parenting students, such that 
existing support systems may not be adequate to 
support their needs and helping to establish a 
plan for providing more comprehensive systems 
of support. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Training and School Support 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 5th Floor, Roxbury, 
MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Email: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org 


Page 28:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 28 of 28 
 
 
 
OR 
Name: 
Senior Executive Director 
Department: 
Office of Health & Wellness 
Mailing Address: 
370 Columbia Rd., Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-7926 
Email: 
healthandwellness@bostonpublicschools. 
org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
EQT-06 
Version 01 
 
 
 
SEXUAL MISCONDUCT TOWARD EMPLOYEES AND 
OTHER THIRD PARTIES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to ensuring a work 
environment free of inappropriate sexual conduct. Inappropriate 
sexual comments or behavior will not be tolerated. In addition, 
any retaliation against an individual who reports inappropriate 
sexual conduct or harassment, or has cooperated with a related 
investigation, is unacceptable. The Boston Public Schools treats 
reports of violations of this policy with the utmost seriousness. 
We will respond promptly to any allegations of sexually 
inappropriate conduct and intervene to cease any conduct that 
violates this policy. Anyone who violates this policy will be subject 
to corrective action up to and including termination.  
DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT 
In Massachusetts, sexual harassment means sexual advances, 
requests for sexual favors, and verbal or physical conduct of a 
sexual nature when: 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-06 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
 
a) Submission to or rejection of such advances, requests, or 
conduct is made, either explicitly or implicitly, a term or 
condition of employment or as a basis for employment 
decisions; or 
b) Such advances, requests, or conduct have the purpose or 
effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual’s work 
performance by creating an intimidating, hostile, 
humiliating, or sexually offensive work environment. 
Please note that while this policy sets forth the goal of promoting 
a workplace that is free of harassment, the policy is not designed 
or intended to limit the district’s authority to discipline or take 
remedial action for workplace conduct that the district deems 
unacceptable, regardless of whether the conduct satisfies the 
definition of unlawful harassment. 
The definition of inappropriate sexual communication and 
behavior is broad. Conduct that is sexual or perceived as sexual, 
and that is welcome or unwelcome, may constitute sexual 
harassment. 
CONDUCT PROHIBITED 
Employees shall not engage in inappropriate sexual conduct 
while employed, working for, attending, or participating in 
district endeavors. Employees are protected from inappropriate 
sexual conduct by anyone they interact with in the course of their 
work. The same standard applies to partners or contractors 
providing services in or under the auspices of the Boston Public 
Schools. Behavior that occurs in a location other than a Boston 
Public Schools building or outside of BPS school or work hours, 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-06 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
 
including when an employee is working remotely, may still 
constitute sexual misconduct and a violation of this policy if that 
behavior has the effect of disrupting an employee’s ability to do 
their job. 
While it is not possible to list all circumstances that may 
constitute prohibited conduct, the following are some examples: 
VERBAL: Using suggestive, derogatory, vulgar comments, or 
sexual innuendos or slurs; making unwanted sexual advances, 
invitations, and/or comments; repeatedly requesting dates; 
spreading rumors about or rating others as to their sexual activity 
or performance; making threats or pressuring others to submit to 
sexual requests; inquiring into one’s sexual activities or 
orientation.  
VISUAL: Displaying sexually suggestive objects, pictures, posters, 
written material, cartoons, or drawings; texting, emailing, or 
sharing digital images or comments of a sexual nature; using 
sexual gestures. 
PHYSICAL: Sexual activity, whether or not it is consensual, in a 
school or any building where BPS business is conducted. 
Participating in unwanted touching, pinching, kissing, hugging; 
blocking normal movement; stalking; engaging in unwanted 
sexual acts or assault; physically interfering with an individual’s 
work because of their actual or perceived sex, sexual orientation, 
gender identity, or gender expression. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-06 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
 
RESPONDING TO REPORTS OF SEXUAL MISCONDUCT  
An employee who believes that they have been a target of 
inappropriate sexual conduct may report the incident to any of 
the following individuals: school principal/head of school, school 
superintendent, or the Office of Equity.  
1. If an employee believes that they have been subjected to 
inappropriate sexual conduct or have witnessed 
inappropriate sexual conduct, the employee has the right to 
file a report with the Boston Police.  
2. The aggrieved employee also has the right to file a report 
with the Boston Public Schools Office of Equity, either orally 
or in writing, at 617-635-9650 or 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org.  
3. Employees in supervisory or managerial roles have an 
obligation to report any employee complaint of sexual 
misconduct to the Office of Equity within two (2) business 
days of learning of the complaint. The person submitting 
the report must ensure the integrity and confidentiality of 
the report and shall not disclose the allegations or any 
related information to either party or to any third party, 
excepting the Office of Equity, unless required by law. 
Employees in a supervisory capacity are required to report 
possible sexual misconduct toward or involving employees, 
vendors, or contractors to the Office of Equity as soon as 
practicable, generally within the same school day. 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-06 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
 
After a report is filed, the Office of Equity or the office’s designee 
will promptly investigate the allegation in a fair and expeditious 
manner. The investigation may include a private interview with 
the person filing the report, the person alleged to have engaged 
in sexually inappropriate conduct, and other witnesses. In some 
circumstances, as determined by the Office of Equity, the person 
alleged to have engaged in the conduct may be placed on 
administrative leave pending the outcome of the investigation. 
BPS employees are obliged to cooperate with the investigation, 
including promptly participating in investigatory interviews, and 
providing any requested information or documents. 
If Boston Public Schools finds that there has been a violation of 
this policy, the district will take action to eliminate the conduct. 
Disciplinary action for employees may include warnings, 
reprimands, required training, suspension or termination of 
employment, or other discipline as appropriate.  
When the investigation is completed, the Office of Equity will 
inform the reporter and the person alleged to have engaged in 
the conduct of the results of the investigation to the extent 
appropriate under the circumstances. 
PROHIBITION OF RETALIATION 
Retaliation against an individual who reports inappropriate 
sexual conduct, sexual harassment, or retaliation against 
individuals for cooperating with an investigation of a sexual 
harassment allegation is unlawful and will not be tolerated by the 
Boston Public Schools. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-06 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
 
STATE AND FEDERAL REMEDIES 
If you believe you have been subjected to unlawful sexual 
harassment, you may also file a formal complaint with either of 
the government agencies set forth below. Using the district’s 
internal reporting process does not preclude you from filing a 
complaint with these agencies. Each agency has a short time 
period for filing a claim (300 days). 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) 
John F. Kennedy Federal Building 
475 Government Center 
Boston, MA 02203 
(800) 660-4000 
 
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (MCAD) 
Office Location: 
Address: 
Boston 
One Ashburton Place, Room 601 
Boston, MA 02108 
(617) 994-6000 
Springfield 
436 Dwight Street, Suite 220 
Springfield, MA 01103 
(413) 739-2145 
New Bedford 
 
800 Purchase Street, Room 501 
New Bedford, MA 02740  
(508) 990-2390 
Worcester 
484 Main Street, Room 320 
Worcester, MA 01608 
(508) 453-9630 
For more information about this circular, contact: 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-06 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
 
Owner: 
Director of Training and School Support 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650  
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
E-mail: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
EQT-04 
Version 01  
 
 
 
TRANSGENDER AND GENDER NONCONFORMING 
STUDENTS  — NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF 
GENDER IDENTITY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
This circular sets out guidelines for schools and district staff to 
create a culture where transgender and gender nonconforming 
students feel safe, supported, and fully included, and to meet 
each school’s obligation to provide educational opportunities for 
all students. We aim to achieve inclusion of transgender and 
gender nonconforming students, while maintaining students’ 
right to privacy.  
BIAS-BASED CONDUCT, DISCRIMINATION, AND HARASSMENT 
Massachusetts law and the Boston Public Schools (BPS) require 
that all classrooms, programs, activities, and employment 
practices be free from bias and discrimination on the basis of sex, 
sexual orientation, and gender identity. It is the responsibility of 
each school and the district to ensure that transgender and 
gender nonconforming students have a safe school environment. 
For policies and procedures about BPS’s “Bullying Prevention 
and Intervention Plan,” please see Superintendent’s Circular SSS-


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-04 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 
 
18. For more information about safety transfers in the district, 
please see Superintendent’s Circular AMT-07.  
Reports of bias, discrimination or harassment based on a person’s 
actual or perceived gender identity or gender nonconformity are 
handled in the same manner as other reports of bias-based 
conduct. Students, employees, and third parties alleged to have 
violated this policy (EQT-04) will be investigated and addressed 
according to the protocols detailed in Superintendent’s Circular 
EQT-02, “Bias-Based Conduct Toward Students Families or Other 
Third Parties.” 
NAMES AND PRONOUNS 
In Massachusetts, an individual may adopt a name that is 
different from the name that appears on their birth certificate. No 
additional legal or other documentation is required for school 
staff to honor student requests to go by a chosen/affirming 
name. If a student or their family is looking to update the name 
that appears on official school records, they may do so either by 
completing the Change of Student Information Form - Name and 
Gender Change Request (if the update is related to gender 
identity) or by contacting BPS Welcome Services (if the update is 
not related to gender identity). Note: This process is not a legal 
name change and does not affect any records other than those 
kept by BPS.  
After a student requests a name change, school personnel shall 
make every effort to consistently use the student’s chosen name 
and stated pronouns. For students who remain in the same 
school following a gender transition, it is important to develop a 
plan for ensuring the use of the chosen name and stated 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-04 
Page 3 of 8 
 
 
 
pronouns. School-based staff are strongly encouraged to contact 
the Office of Equity for additional support in this process. 
PRIVACY, CONFIDENTIALITY, AND STUDENT RECORDS 
Under Massachusetts law, information about a student’s 
assigned birth sex, gender transition, name change associated 
with transition, medical or mental health treatment related to 
gender identity, or any other related information is part of the 
individual’s student record (for more information, see the 
Massachusetts Student Records Regulations, 603 CMR 23.00). 
Student records are confidential and must be kept private and 
secure except in limited circumstances, such as when authorized 
school personnel require the information to provide 
administrative, teaching, counseling, nursing, or other services to 
the student in the performance of their official duties. Authorized 
school personnel may include, but are not limited to, individuals 
such as the principal, school nurse, classroom teacher(s), social 
worker, and/or guidance counselor.  
When a student new to a school is using a chosen or affirming 
name, the birth name is considered private information and may 
be disclosed only with authorization as provided under the 
Massachusetts Student Records Regulations. If the student has 
previously been known at school and/or in school records by their 
birth name, school personnel must use the student’s chosen 
name. School personnel should not disclose information that 
may reveal a student’s transgender status or gender 
nonconforming presentation to others, including parents and 
other school personnel, unless legally required to do so, for safety 
reasons, or if the student and/or guardian has authorized such 
disclosure.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-04 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 
 
Transgender and gender nonconforming students have the right 
to discuss and express their gender identity and expression 
openly and to decide when, with whom, and how much 
information to share. A student who is 14 years of age or older, or 
who has entered the ninth grade, may consent to disclosure of 
information from their student record. If a student is under 14 
and is not yet in the ninth grade, only the student’s parent has 
the authority to decide on disclosures and other student record 
matters.  
To the extent that the school is not legally required to use a 
student’s legal name and gender on other school records or 
documents, every effort shall be made to update student records 
with the student’s chosen name and not circulate records with 
the student’s birth name. Records with the student’s birth name 
shall be kept confidential. 
For more information about Student Record Regulations, please 
see Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07.  
RESTROOMS, LOCKER ROOMS, AND CHANGING FACILITIES 
In accordance with Massachusetts law, all students are entitled to 
have access to restrooms, locker rooms, and changing facilities 
consistent with the student’s gender identity.  As part of the 
transition process, the school leader (or their designee) and 
student (and parent/guardian, when applicable) shall address the 
student’s access to the restrooms, locker room, and changing 
facilities.  
Each situation needs to be addressed based on the particular 
circumstances of the student and the school facilities. In all cases, 
the school leader (or their designee) shall be clear with the 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-04 
Page 5 of 8 
 
 
 
student (and parent/guardian when applicable) that the student 
may access the restroom, locker room, and changing facility that 
corresponds to the student’s gender identity. Transgender 
students who prefer not to use a sex-segregated restroom should 
be provided with a safe and adequate alternative, such as a single 
stall restroom or nurse’s restroom if possible. The single-user 
facility, however, may not be given as the only option for 
transgender or gender nonconforming students.  
School-based staff should be aware that there will be students 
who do not identify along the gender binary (boy/girl or 
man/woman). These students may use terms such as 
“nonbinary,” “gender fluid,” or “gender queer” to describe their 
gender identity. They should be given access to whichever facility 
feels most comfortable to them. Students who prefer not to use a 
sex-segregated restroom should be provided with a safe and 
adequate alternative, such as a single stall restroom or nurse’s 
restroom if possible. The single-user facility, however, may not be 
given as the only option for transgender or gender 
nonconforming students. If possible, schools should consider 
designating one or more restrooms at their school as “all gender,” 
meaning that anyone of any gender may use that restroom.  
Student and/or school staff discomfort is not an acceptable 
reason to deny restroom access to transgender and/or gender 
nonconforming students. School administrators, educators, and 
counseling staff should take a proactive approach to address any 
discomfort, foster understanding, and create a school culture 
that respects and values all students. School-based staff may 
contact the Office of Equity for additional support in this area. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-04 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 
 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION CLASSES, INTRAMURAL SPORTS, AND 
INTERSCHOLASTIC ATHLETIC ACTIVITIES 
Where there are sex-segregated classes or athletic activities, 
including intramural and interscholastic athletics, all students 
must be allowed to participate in a manner consistent with their 
gender identity. The Massachusetts Interscholastic Athletic 
Association, as outlined in their Gender Identity Policy 
Clarification, will defer to the determination made by the student 
and their school regarding gender identity.  
DRESS CODES 
All students have the right to dress in a manner consistent with 
their gender identity or expression. In general, schools should 
eliminate dress codes that restrict students’ clothing or 
appearance on the basis of gender.(1) School staff must not 
enforce the dress code more strictly against transgender and 
gender-nonconforming students than other students.  
DIPLOMAS 
Graduating students are entitled to use a chosen or affirming 
name on their BPS diploma, this name may be different from the 
name listed in student records. Students wanting a diploma 
printed with a name other than or in addition to the name listed 
in student records should speak to their school guidance 
counselor or the LGBTQ+ student support manager.   
 
(1) The Office of Equity will provide schools with a sample dress 
code upon request.  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-04 
Page 7 of 8 
 
 
 
GENDER-BASED ACTIVITIES, RULES, POLICIES AND PRACTICES 
Schools should evaluate all gender-based policies, rules, and 
practices, and maintain only those with a clear and sound 
pedagogical purpose and equivalent offerings for students of all 
genders. Gender-based policies, rules, and practices may have 
the effect of marginalizing, stigmatizing, and excluding students, 
including gender nonconforming students.  
Whenever students are separated by gender in school activities 
or are subject to an otherwise lawful gender-specific rule, policy, 
or practice, students must be permitted to participate in such 
activities or conform to such rule, policy, or practice consistent 
with their gender identity.  
RELATED RESOURCES 
• The Gay, Lesbian and Straight Education Network (GLSEN) 
Gender Terminology Guide is available here: 
https://www.glsen.org/activity/gender-terminology.  
• For information about the Boston Public Schools policies on 
bias-based conduct or bullying, see Superintendent’s 
Circulars EQT-02, EQT-03, or SSS-18. 
• For more information about the Massachusetts gender 
identity law, see the Massachusetts Department of 
Elementary and Secondary Education guidance document, 
“Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Gender Identity” at 
http://www.doe.mass.edu/ssce/GenderIdentity.pdf. 
• Contact the Office of Equity at 617-635-9650 or 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org for information about 
additional support. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-04 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Training and School Support 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., 5th floor, Roxbury, MA 
02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
Email: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
EQT-01 
Version 01 
 
 
 
NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to maintaining an 
educational environment and workplace where individuals of all 
backgrounds and experiences are welcomed, encouraged, 
included, and can flourish. We aim to eliminate all forms of bias 
and bigotry, including discrimination based on race, color, age, 
criminal record (inquiries only), physical or mental disability, 
pregnancy and pregnancy-related conditions, homelessness, 
sex/gender, gender identity, religion, national origin, ancestry, 
sexual orientation, genetics, natural or protective hairstyle, and 
military status. The Boston Public Schools is resolved that 
prejudice and disparate treatment will never impede our learners 
or our educators. 
The Boston Public Schools will not tolerate discriminatory 
behavior, including intimidation, threats, or harassment of 
employees, students, or anyone else who visits or is part of our 
learning community. Retaliatory conduct toward persons who 
have reported possible bias, discrimination, or inappropriate 
behavior, who have assisted in an investigation, or who have 
otherwise exercised their rights under this policy is also 
prohibited. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-01 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
 
Conduct in violation of this policy includes any action, including 
verbal or nonverbal communication, that contributes to, 
promotes, or is complicit in disrupting the district’s inclusive 
learning and working environment. Derogatory or intimidating 
statements, threats, acts of exclusion, or other mistreatment 
regarding a student’s or employee’s membership in or 
association with a member of a protected group, whether made 
in person or by telephone, postal mail, e-mail, internet posting, or 
any other means, will not be tolerated. This includes such 
statements made toward students, members of students’ 
families, employees, contractors, or other parties who support or 
participate in district programming. 
This policy extends to all employment and educational practices 
and programs, including: 
• Recruitment 
• Selection and admission 
• Compensation and benefits 
• Access to learning 
• Professional development, training, and extracurricular 
activities 
• Discipline, evaluation, and testing 
• Reasonable accommodation for disabilities or religious 
practices 
• Promotion 
• Transfer 
• Termination 
• Layoff 
• Other terms and conditions of employment and education. 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-01 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
 
The Boston Public Schools will vigorously implement and actively 
enforce this policy to ensure that all its daily operations are 
characterized by fairness, respect, and equity. Any violation of this 
policy will be viewed as serious misconduct and may result in 
discipline, up to and including termination of the offending 
employee or expulsion of the responsible student. Retaliation 
against any person who has testified, assisted, or participated in 
any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing of a 
report of a violation of this policy, will similarly be viewed as 
serious misconduct and may result in discipline, up to and 
including termination or expulsion. 
Information about the investigative procedures associated with 
this policy is detailed in Superintendent’s Circulars EQT-02 and 
EQT-05. 
All Boston Public Schools newly printed publications (e.g., Code 
of Conduct, Citywide Learning Standards and Curriculum 
Frameworks, course selection booklets, student/parent/employee 
handbooks, job postings, etc.) for students, parents, teachers, 
non-academic employees, and the general public must contain 
the following nondiscrimination notice: 
The Boston Public Schools, in accordance with its 
nondiscrimination policies, does not discriminate in its 
programs, facilities, or employment or educational 
opportunities on the basis of race, color, age, criminal 
record (inquiries only), disability, pregnancy, homelessness, 
sex/gender, gender identity, religion, national origin, 
ancestry, sexual orientation, genetics, natural or protective 
hairstyle, or military status, and does not tolerate any form 
of retaliation, or bias-based intimidation, threat, or 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-01 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
 
harassment that demeans individuals’ dignity or interferes 
with their ability to learn or work. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Assistant Superintendent of Equity 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
Email: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
EQT-07 
Version 01 
 
 
 
ACCOMMODATING EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES, 
PREGNANCY, AND PREGNANCY-RELATED CONDITIONS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to providing equal 
employment opportunity to all individuals, in accordance with 
Chapter 151B of the Massachusetts General Laws and with the 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). This circular provides 
information about the district procedures to address 
accommodation requests for employees on the basis of disability, 
pregnancy, and pregnancy-related conditions.  
EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES 
Any current or prospective employee who is an individual with a 
disability may request a reasonable accommodation to assist in 
performing the essential functions of their assignment. 
Chapter 151B and the ADA define a person with a disability as 
someone who: (1) has a physical or mental impairment that 
substantially limits one or more major life activities; (2) has a 
record of such an impairment; or (3) is regarded as having such 
an impairment.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-07 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 
 
Major life activities include, but are not limited to, caring for 
oneself, performing manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, 
sleeping, walking, standing, lifting, bending, speaking, breathing, 
learning, reading, concentrating, thinking, communicating, and 
working, and the operation of a major bodily function. Although 
not exhaustive, examples of the range and variety of disabilities 
included under these laws are provided below.  
• Non-Ambulatory Disabilities – Physical impairments, 
regardless of cause, that require an individual to use a 
wheelchair, including individuals who are paraplegic, 
quadriplegic, hemiplegic, or have had a limb or limbs 
amputated. 
• Semi-Ambulatory Disabilities – Physical impairments that 
cause a person to walk with difficulty, perhaps with the 
assistance of a cane, crutches, or walker. 
• Coordination Disabilities – Impairments of muscle control of 
the limbs. 
• Sight Disabilities – Impairments affecting vision totally or 
partially. 
• Hearing Disabilities – Impairments affecting hearing totally 
or partially. 
• Speech Impairments – Impairments affecting totally or 
partially the ability to communicate orally. 
• Learning Disabilities – Impairments that impede learning 
processes. 
• Mental or Psychological Disorders – Impairments affecting 
individuals’ neurological and/or psychological functioning, 
behavior, and/or mood. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-07 
Page 3 of 6 
 
 
 
The district’s nondiscrimination policy prohibits bias-based 
conduct or discrimination on the basis of disability in any aspect 
of the employment relationship, including: 
1. 
Recruitment, advertising, and the processing of 
applications 
2. 
Hiring, evaluation, upgrading, promotion, award of 
permanent teacher status, demotion, transfer, layoff, 
termination, right of return from layoff, and rehiring 
3. 
Rates of pay or any other form of compensation, and 
changes in compensation 
4. 
Job assignments, job classifications, organizational 
structures, position descriptions, lines of progression, 
and seniority lists 
5. 
Leaves of absence, sick leave, or any other leave 
6. 
Fringe benefits available by virtue of employment, 
whether or not administered by the Boston Public 
Schools 
7. 
Selection and financial support for training, including 
professional development, conferences, and other 
related activities, and selection for leave of absence to 
pursue training. 
PREGNANCY AND PREGNANCY-RELATED CONDITIONS 
As of April 1, 2018, any current or prospective employee who is 
pregnant or has a pregnancy-related condition, such as lactation 
or the need to express breast milk, may request a reasonable 
accommodation to assist in performing the essential functions of 
their assignment.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-07 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 
 
If an employee requests an accommodation for: (1) more frequent 
restroom, food, or water breaks; (2) seating; (3) limits on lifting no 
more than 20 pounds; and (4) private, non-bathroom space for 
expressing breast milk, no medical documentation 
accompanying such a written request is necessary. Other 
accommodation requests may require supporting medical 
documentation or information.  
Employees who are pregnant or have pregnancy-related 
conditions may contact the Office of Equity to begin the 
accommodations process.  
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION PROCESS 
A “reasonable accommodation” is any modification or 
adjustment to a job or work environment that allows an 
applicant or employee with a disability, pregnancy, and 
pregnancy-related conditions to participate in the job application 
process, perform the essential functions of a job, or enjoy benefits 
and privileges of employment equal to those enjoyed by 
employees. Upon receiving a request for a reasonable 
accommodation, the Boston Public Schools will engage in an 
interactive dialogue process. The district will attempt to provide 
reasonable accommodations unless it would cause an undue 
hardship or fundamentally alter the district’s programs.  
Any applicant or employee seeking reasonable accommodations 
on the basis of a disability, pregnancy, and pregnancy-related 
conditions may contact the Office of Equity to begin the process. 
Information an employee chooses to submit during the 
accommodation process, such as relevant medical 
documentation, will be kept confidential to the extent 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-07 
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
 
practicable. Information collected in the reasonable 
accommodation process will be kept in a confidential file with 
the Office of Equity.  
Your cooperation in implementing a policy of nondiscrimination 
against persons with disabilities will assist the Boston Public 
Schools in ensuring equal opportunity for all employees and 
potential employees. 
STATE AND FEDERAL REMEDIES 
If you believe you have been subjected to unlawful discrimination 
on the basis of disability, pregnancy, and pregnancy-related 
conditions, you may file a formal complaint with either of the 
government agencies set forth below. Using BPS' internal 
reporting process does not prohibit you from also filing a 
complaint with these agencies. These agencies have a short time 
period for filing a claim (300 days from the most recent act of 
alleged discrimination). 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) 
John F. Kennedy Federal Building 
475 Government Center 
Boston, MA 02203 
Phone: 1-800-660-4000 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-07 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 
 
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (MCAD) 
Office Location: 
Address: 
Boston 
One Ashburton Place, Room 601 
Boston, MA 02108 
(617) 994-6000 
Springfield 
436 Dwight Street, Suite 220 
Springfield, MA 01103 
(413) 739-2145 
New Bedford 
 
800 Purchase Street, Room 501 
New Bedford, MA 02740  
(508) 990-2390 
Worcester 
484 Main Street, Room 320 
Worcester, MA 01608 
(508) 453-9630 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Accommodations in the Office of 
Equity 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
E-mail: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
EQT-02 
Version 01 
 
 
 
BIAS-BASED CONDUCT TOWARD STUDENTS, FAMILIES, 
OR OTHER THIRD PARTIES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
PURPOSE 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to maintaining an 
environment free of bias and discrimination where all students 
can flourish, and all families are welcome and able to engage fully 
as partners in students’ education.  
The Boston Public Schools utilizes the procedures outlined in this 
circular to investigate and resolve reports of alleged violations of 
the district’s nondiscrimination policy (see EQT-01) that are 
targeted at students, families, or other third parties. These 
procedures are designed to facilitate a prompt and effective 
internal review and resolution of allegations of bias-based 
conduct or discrimination based on race, color, age, disability, 
sex/gender, gender identity, religion, national origin, ancestry, 
retaliation, sexual orientation, genetics, natural or protective 
hairstyle, military status, or homelessness. The intent of these 
procedures is to ensure that, to the greatest extent possible, 
reports of bias-based conduct are resolved in a constructive 
manner. 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
 
Employees of the Boston Public Schools who become aware of 
any possible bias-based conduct toward or involving students 
must report the incident or concern to their school leader, 
supervisor, and/or the Office of Equity as soon as practicable, 
generally within the same school day. The same standard applies 
to partners or contractors providing services in or under the 
auspices of the Boston Public Schools. 
COVERAGE 
The procedures pertain solely to reports explicitly alleging bias-
based conduct related to race, color, age, disability, sex/gender, 
gender identity, pregnancy, religion, national origin, ancestry, 
retaliation, sexual orientation, genetics, natural or protective 
hairstyle, military status, or homelessness. This applies to 
allegations of discrimination, harassment, or bias-based bullying 
in any activity under the auspices of the Boston Public Schools, 
including, but not limited to: 
• Admission  
• Provision and accessibility of programs and services  
• Guidance practices 
• Participation in sporting events or other extracurricular 
activities. 
 
Examples of unacceptable conduct include treating students 
differently because of their membership in a protected group, 
such that the treatment interferes with or limits the student’s 
ability to participate in or benefit from an educational 
opportunity or extracurricular program. Bias-based conduct also 
includes derogatory verbal, written, print, or digital 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
 
communication or conduct relating to a student’s membership in 
a protected category. Any form of communication or physical 
action that creates an intimidating, threatening, or abusive 
educational environment will not be tolerated. 
Such conduct may originate with students as well as employees 
and may also be caused by other persons who participate, 
observe, or otherwise engage in a district-sponsored activity. 
Behavior that occurs in a location other than a Boston Public 
Schools building or outside of BPS school or work hours may still 
constitute bias-based conduct and a violation of this policy if that 
behavior has the effect of disrupting a student's ability to learn. 
Examples of inappropriate behavior toward students that may 
violate this policy include:  
• Speaking or otherwise communicating derisively to or about 
a student or parent because of their membership in a 
protected group, such as their race, including the use of 
slurs 
• Telling or digitally circulating jokes that are derisive toward 
members of a particular group, such as a student of a 
particular religious faith  
• Using insulting nicknames for members of a protected 
group, such as a female student 
• Refusing to allow students to participate in any activity 
because of their membership in a protected group, such as 
their sexual orientation, and in the absence of a legitimate 
nondiscriminatory reason for the refusal  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
 
• Disciplining a student more frequently or more harshly 
because of their membership in a protected group, such as 
their national origin 
• Displaying pictures or taking any action that is derisive to 
any student based on their membership in a  
• Refusal to use the gender identity affirming name and/or 
pronouns that a student has stated. 
Students sometimes experience “microaggressions”: verbal or 
nonverbal communication that is rooted in implicit bias but does 
not rise to the level of a violation of this circular. Examples 
include: 
• Mistaking one student for another because they share the 
same racial identity 
• Complimenting a student for having a skill that is counter to 
a stereotype regarding their gender or ethnicity 
• Assuming a student observes a particular religious holiday 
or has a particular sexual orientation 
• Asking a student about their disability without their 
consent.  
When microaggressions are reported to the Office of Equity, the 
Office will partner with the student, family, and appropriate 
school staff to determine an effective intervention, such as 
coaching, mediation, restorative justice, or individual, classroom, 
or school-wide instruction or training.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
 
 
GENERAL POLICIES 
1. Retaliation against any student, family member, or other 
third party for reporting or participating in any way in the 
reporting or investigative procedure is strictly prohibited. 
2. Whenever possible, investigatory meetings will be 
scheduled during a mutually convenient time that does 
not conflict with regularly scheduled school programs. 
3. Reporting a possible violation will not be construed as 
reflecting unfavorably on a student, family member, or 
other third party’s good standing, academic performance, 
loyalty, or desirability to the Boston Public Schools. 
4. Information regarding the allegations, including the 
parties involved in the report and the investigation, will 
be kept confidential to the extent practicable. 
5. In determining whether the alleged conduct constitutes a 
violation of the BPS nondiscriminatory policy, the 
Superintendent or their designee will consider the 
surrounding circumstances, the nature of the behavior, 
the relationships between the parties involved, and the 
context in which the alleged incidents occurred. A 
determination whether a particular action or incident 
constitutes a violation of the policy will be based on all 
the facts. 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
 
PROCEDURES 
I. Reports to School Leaders 
Students, families, and other third parties are encouraged to 
report concerns regarding bias-based incidents of any kind 
to their school’s principal or headmaster. It is advised to file 
this report as close to the time of the incident as possible, as 
matters are generally more easily resolved the sooner they 
are reported.  
The principal or headmaster (or their designee) will attempt 
to work with the individual(s) to resolve the matter. They will 
contact the Office of Equity to ensure that any next steps 
are carried out in partnership with the Office of Equity and 
appropriately documented. 
Students, families, or other third parties who do not wish to 
seek assistance from their school’s principal or headmaster, 
or who are dissatisfied with the principal’s or headmaster’s 
attempt at resolution, may report their concerns directly to 
the Office of Equity. Nothing in this policy shall prevent a 
student, family member, or other third party from reporting 
a concern directly to the Office of Equity. 
II. Reports to the Office of Equity 
1. A member of the Office of Equity staff will ask the 
reporter for information regarding the incident(s) and 
may request that the reporter submit a written 
statement. The Office of Equity will ensure that assistance 
is provided in preparing such a written statement, if 
needed. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
 
2. After a report is received, the Office of Equity will notify 
the appropriate school leader(s) and/or the individual 
about whom the report has been filed, as appropriate. 
3. The Office of Equity will conduct a fair, impartial, 
thorough, and prompt review of the reported incident(s) 
and investigate as needed. Any investigation may include 
interviews with individuals who have pertinent 
information, and review of any documents or other 
information relevant to the investigation. BPS employees 
and students are obligated to cooperate with any Equity 
investigation, including promptly providing any 
requested information or documents.  
4. The individual who reported alleged bias-based conduct 
and any subjects of the investigation will generally be 
informed when the investigation is complete and 
whether prohibited conduct was found. Depending on 
the facts gathered, the Office of Equity may resolve the 
concerns by applying approaches such as alternative 
dispute resolution, restorative justice, training, or 
coaching. In other instances, the results of the 
investigation may also be documented as written 
findings.  
5. The Office of Equity will maintain records of all reports of 
bias-based conduct made to the Office of Equity, noting 
the school or department in which the alleged incident(s) 
occurred, the person accused, and the results of the 
investigation. The Office of Equity may review its records 
to identify any patterns and take appropriate action as 
necessary.  
The Office of Equity will: 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
 
1. Take seriously all concerns regarding possible bias-based 
conduct. 
2. Take necessary steps to end any conduct determined to 
be in violation of the district’s nondiscrimination policy 
and prevent this conduct from recurring in the future.  
3. Refer individuals found to have violated the district’s 
nondiscrimination policy for disciplinary action when 
appropriate.  
For employees, such action may include written warning, 
suspension, termination, or another action deemed 
appropriate under the circumstances. (For more 
information about Employee Discipline Procedures, 
please see Superintendent Circular HRS-PP10.) 
For students, such action may include suspension, 
expulsion, or another action deemed appropriate under 
the circumstances. (For more information on student 
discipline, please see the Code of Discipline for Students 
and Students with Disabilities – Superintendent Circulars 
SUP-05 and SPE-15.)  
4. Require students, employees, or other third parties found 
to violate the district’s nondiscrimination policy to attend 
Equity protocols and/or bias prevention training, as 
appropriate. 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
 
STATE AND FEDERAL REMEDIES 
Using the BPS Equity reporting process does not prohibit you 
from also filing a complaint with a state or federal agency. These 
agencies have a short time period for filing a claim (OCR – 180 
days; DESE – within the same school year; MCAD – 300 days). 
 For incidents involving students’ civil rights: 
United States Department of Education Office for Civil 
Rights (OCR) 
John W. McCormack Post Office and Courthouse  
5 Post Office Square, 8th Floor, Suite 900, Boston, MA 02109 
 
(617) 289-0111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 For concerns regarding students’ equitable access to 
education: 
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education (DESE) 
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02108 
(781) 388-3300 
 
 For concerns regarding civil rights related to food and 
nutrition (school-provided meals): 
U.S. Department of Agriculture Office of the Assistant 
Secretary for Civil Rights  
1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250 
 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 
 For incidents regarding employees’ civil rights: 
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (MCAD) 
 
Office Location: 
Address: 
Boston 
One Ashburton Place, Room 601 
Boston, MA 02108 
(617) 994-6000 
Springfield 
436 Dwight Street, Suite 220 
Springfield, MA 01103 
(413) 739-2145 
New Bedford 
 
800 Purchase Street, Room 501 
New Bedford, MA 02740  
(508) 990-2390 
Worcester 
484 Main Street, Room 320 
Worcester, MA 01608 
(508) 453-9630 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Compliance and Title IX 
Coordinator 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
Email: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
EQT-03 
Version 01 
 
 
 
SEXUAL MISCONDUCT TOWARD STUDENTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
INTRODUCTION 
The Boston Public Schools (BPS) is committed to ensuring that 
students learn in an environment free of sexual misconduct. 
Sexual misconduct committed against a BPS student will not be 
tolerated. In addition, acts of retaliation against an individual who 
reports an allegation of sexual misconduct or cooperates with a 
related investigation are unacceptable and will not be tolerated. 
Students participating in BPS academic, educational, 
extracurricular, athletic, and school programs or activities are 
protected from sexual misconduct by other students, parents, 
BPS employees, and third parties (e.g., visitors). In addition, BPS 
students may be protected from sexual misconduct that occurs 
outside the context of a school’s education program, activity, or 
school property, if the behavior was in connection with a school 
program or activity which includes locations, events, or 
circumstances over which the district exercised substantial 
control over both the person accused of the conduct and the 
context in which the sexual misconduct occurred.   
The Boston Public Schools treats reports of sexual misconduct 
with the utmost seriousness. We will address any sexually 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 2 of 14 
 
 
 
inappropriate communication or behavior directed toward 
students, regardless of whether that conduct is unlawful. This 
policy is neither designed nor intended to limit the district’s 
authority to discipline or take remedial action for conduct that 
the Boston Public Schools deems unacceptable. 
DEFINITION OF SEXUAL MISCONDUCT 
For the purposes of this policy, sexual misconduct constitutes 
sexually inappropriate comments and/or behaviors of any kind. 
Below are examples of sexual misconduct: 
Sexual Violence 
Sexual violence is broadly defined as any sexual activity that is 
forced, coerced, or unwanted. It also includes any sexual act 
against another person who is incapable of giving consent, either 
because of their temporary or permanent mental or physical 
incapacity, or because they are a minor.  
Consent is defined as clear, active agreement and permission to 
engage in any form of verbal or nonverbal sexual communication 
or activity with another person. The initiator of the sexual contact 
is responsible for obtaining consent before engaging in any 
sexual contact. Consent can be withdrawn by either party at any 
point. Consent must be voluntary and may not be valid if a 
person is being subjected to an emotional, psychological, 
physical, reputational, or financial threat, intimidation, or 
coercion. Consent to engage in one sexual activity, or past 
agreement to engage in a particular sexual activity, cannot be 
presumed to constitute consent to engage in a different sexual 
activity or to engage again in a sexual activity. Consent cannot be 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 3 of 14 
 
 
 
validly given by a person who is incapacitated or under the age of 
sixteen.  
Sexual violence may include criminal acts, such as indecent 
assault and battery, rape, abuse, or assault with intent to rape. 
Any acts that may be criminal will be referred to law 
enforcement. 
Examples of sexual violence may include, but are not limited to, 
the following: 
• Unwelcome sexual touching  
• Non-consensual sexual contact that occurs during school or 
non-school hours, on or off school grounds, including dating 
violence 
• Recruiting, transporting, obtaining, or providing a student of 
any gender for the purpose of sex. 
Other Forms Of Sexual Misconduct 
Sexual misconduct includes unwelcome conduct of a sexual 
nature that denies or limits, on the basis of sex, a student's ability 
to participate in or to receive benefits, services, or opportunities 
in the school's program or activities. 
Examples of behavior that may constitute sexual misconduct 
depending upon the totality of the circumstances, the ages of 
the student or other individuals involved, and the severity and 
pervasiveness of the conduct, include but are not limited to: 
• Sexual advances, whether or not they involve touching 
• Requests for sexual favors 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 4 of 14 
 
 
 
• Making an educational decision or benefit contingent upon 
a student’s submission to unwelcome sexual conduct 
• Offensive public sexual display of affection, including 
groping, fondling, gestures, or inappropriate touching of 
oneself or others 
• Consensual groping, fondling, sexual touching, or sex on 
school property or at any school-sponsored activity  
• Sexual jokes or references 
• Comments regarding a student’s body or a student’s sexual 
activity or orientation 
• Offensive name calling or profanity that is sexually 
suggestive, sexually degrading, or based on sexual 
stereotypes or sexual orientation 
• Different treatment because of pregnancy status 
• Displaying or distributing sexually explicit drawings, 
pictures, or other materials in any form (such as sexting) 
• Trafficking of youth for sexual purposes, such as recruiting, 
transporting, or otherwise exploiting a minor in exchange 
for money, shelter, or food  
• Sexual advances or contact, whether or not they are 
consensual, between a student and employee, contractor, or 
community partner  
• Sexual activity between students in a school, or any building 
where BPS business is conducted 
• Other verbal, nonverbal, or physical conduct of a sexual 
nature. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 5 of 14 
 
 
 
Any student, regardless of gender identity or sexual orientation, 
can be a target of sexual misconduct, and the alleged targets and 
the subject of the concern can be of the same or different 
genders. 
Employees of the Boston Public Schools who become aware of 
any possible sexual misconduct toward or involving students 
must report the incident or concern to their school leader, 
supervisor, and/or the Office of Equity as soon as practicable, 
generally within the same school day. The same reporting 
requirement applies to partners or contractors providing services 
to students in or under the auspices of the Boston Public Schools. 
The above list of examples is not exhaustive. If you are unsure 
whether a student may have been a target of sexual misconduct 
or if you have knowledge of a possible incident of sexual 
misconduct involving a student, immediately contact your school 
principal/head of school, supervisor, or the Office of Equity at 617-
635-9650 or bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org. 
REPORTING AND INVESTIGATING SEXUAL MISCONDUCT  
A student, parent, or other third party who believes that a 
student has been subjected to inappropriate sexual conduct may 
report the incident to the principal/head of school or the Office of 
Equity. 
The Boston Public Schools will promptly investigate allegations 
of sexual misconduct even when the incident is being 
investigated by law enforcement or another entity. Our 
obligation is to determine if there has been a violation of a BPS 
circular and/or the BPS Code of Conduct. The investigation will 
be conducted in a manner maintaining confidentiality to the 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 6 of 14 
 
 
 
extent practicable under the circumstances. Incidents that a BPS 
employee becomes aware of directly or indirectly, such as from a 
note or an overheard conversation, will also be investigated.  
Interim measures for the safety of the students involved must be 
taken upon receipt of the report to ensure equal access to 
educational programs and activities. 
If the investigation results in a finding of a violation of this policy, 
Boston Public Schools will take steps to end the misconduct, 
prevent any further misconduct, remedy its effects where 
appropriate, and take disciplinary action, as deemed appropriate 
under the circumstances.  
REPORTING PROCEDURES  
(see Appendix A checklist) 
These instructions assume that the Office of Equity has already 
been informed of an incident as required, and that a school 
administrator has been instructed to follow this protocol. 
After receiving a report of sexual misconduct, the building 
administrator must immediately (within the same school day, 
with rare exceptions): 
1. Ensure that a student who discloses sexual misconduct is 
not interviewed by any other BPS employee subsequent to 
the initial disclosure, unless otherwise specifically directed 
by law enforcement, the state Department of Children and 
Families (DCF), or the Office of Equity. To minimize the 
alleged target’s emotional distress and to preserve the 
integrity and reliability of any investigation, the initial 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 7 of 14 
 
 
 
disclosure conversation should be limited to the essential 
facts. The BPS staff member who first receives the report 
must document the conversation as thoroughly as possible. 
2. Assess the need for emergency interim safety measures to 
prevent any additional incidents and ensure that the target 
is able to fully engage in the school’s programs and 
activities. Implement any plan as appropriate.  
3. Report the incident to your school’s Safety Specialist or 
Safety Services at 617-635-8000 if the allegation involves 
sexual assault or violence, such as physical contact or 
threats. Call Safety Services even if you are not sure if the 
alleged incident constitutes sexual violence. Inform the 
school nurse if medical care is needed.  
If Safety Services are not available, call 911.  
Depending on the nature of the allegations, the Office of 
Safety Services may work directly with the Boston Police 
Department School Unit. Thereafter, the Boston Police 
Crimes Against Children Unit may conduct the 
investigation. A team investigation may include other 
agency involvement. By law, the police cannot provide the 
Boston Public Schools with a written report regarding an 
incident of sexual violence. 
4. Contact the Department of Children and Families (DCF) to 
file a 51A report if the allegation warrants. As mandated 
reporters, employees of the Boston Public Schools are 
required to report situations when there is reasonable cause 
to believe a student is suffering from physical or emotional 
injury that causes harm or a substantial risk of harm to the 
student’s health or welfare.  


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 8 of 14 
 
 
 
Questions related to school employees’ obligation to file a 
51A report with DCF should be directed to the Office of Legal 
Advisor. Please also refer to Superintendent’s Circular SSS-17 
on Child Abuse and Neglect.  
If the alleged subject is over 18 years old, under 7 years old, 
or has a disability that might manifest as inappropriate 
sexual conduct, please call the Office of Equity prior to filing 
a 51A. 
5. Always alert the school’s operational leader. If you wish, 
and/or upon request of the Office of Equity, also alert the 
school’s elementary or secondary school superintendent. 
Depending on the severity and complexity of the 
allegations, the school superintendent and/or operational 
leader will then partner with the designated school 
administrator and/or the Office of Equity to complete the 
investigation. 
6. Notify the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of the reporter or 
alleged victim, if a minor, unless the parent/legal guardian is 
the subject of the concern and/or such notification will 
create a substantial risk to the student’s health, safety, or 
welfare.  
7. If the subject of the concern is a minor, the building 
administrator (or other Office of Equity Designee) should 
notify the subject’s parent(s) or legal guardian(s). For 
reasons of confidentiality, do not inform the subject’s family 
of the alleged target’s identity or gender.  
8. Submit Section 1 of the Equity Student Incident & 
Investigation Form within the same school day, if possible, 
but always within 48 hours of the incident. This document 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 9 of 14 
 
 
 
should be treated as confidential and sent to the Office of 
Equity only. Only share this document or other related 
documents as directed by the Office of Equity, Office of 
Legal Advisor, or law enforcement authorities. The form can 
be submitted digitally via this link. 
9. Investigate and document the allegation. If it is determined 
by a preponderance of the evidence that inappropriate 
conduct occurred, the Boston Public Schools will take such 
actions as it deems appropriate under the circumstances. 
For students, such actions will be consistent with the Code 
of Conduct, and may also include training, mediation, or 
restorative practices. For employees, such actions will be 
consistent with the district’s labor practices, and may 
include training, restorative practices, and/or discipline. 
10. Submit Section 2 of the Equity Student Incident & 
Investigation Form within 10 days of the incident. When 
completing the narrative, staff should document witness 
statements and the subject’s response to the allegation(s). 
Additionally, staff should document the investigatory 
findings and remedial action taken, if any. The form can be 
submitted digitally via this link. 
During the investigation, the alleged target of the 
misconduct should not discuss the incident with the subject 
of the concern present under any circumstances. 
 
For detailed guidance on investigating and documenting 
allegations of sexual misconduct, please follow the Boston 
Public Schools Protocols for Sexual Misconduct 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 10 of 14 
 
 
 
Investigations Conducted by School Leaders and Central 
Office Managers. 
 
All reports submitted through the Equity Student Incident & 
Investigation Form will be reviewed by the Office of Equity. 
PROHIBITION OF RETALIATION 
Retaliation against an individual who reports sexual misconduct 
and retaliation against individuals for cooperating with a related 
investigation is unlawful and will not be tolerated by the Boston 
Public Schools. 
Reports of retaliation should be brought to the building 
administrator or the person who is conducting the investigation. 
A student who feels there has been retaliation following a 
complaint may also call the Office of Equity at 617-635-9650.  
BPS TITLE IX COORDINATOR 
The Boston Public Schools’ Title IX coordinator is responsible for 
ensuring compliance with the investigatory process outlined in 
EQT-3, and tracking incidents across the district. Any parent or 
employee who raises concerns regarding the investigatory 
process and/or outcomes may contact the district’s Title IX 
coordinator: 
 
Director of Compliance and Title IX Coordinator 
Boston Public Schools 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 617-635-9650, Fax: 617-635-7940  


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 11 of 14 
 
 
 
Email: bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org 
OTHER RESOURCES  
United States Department of Education Office for Civil Rights 
(OCR) 
5 Post Office Square, 8th Floor, Boston, MA 02109 
(617) 289-0111 
 
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (MCAD) 
Office Location: 
Address: 
Boston 
One Ashburton Place, Room 601 
Boston, MA 02108 
(617) 994-6000 
Springfield 
436 Dwight Street, Suite 220 
Springfield, MA 01103 
(413) 739-2145 
New Bedford 
 
800 Purchase Street, Room 501 
New Bedford, MA 02740  
(508) 990-2390 
Worcester 
484 Main Street, Room 320 
Worcester, MA 01608 
(508) 453-9630 
 
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education 
Program Quality Assurance 
75 Pleasant Street, Malden, MA 02148-4906 
(781) 338-3700 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 12 of 14 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Training and School Support 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
Email: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
For matters involving DCF, contact: 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor  
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 13 of 14 
 
 
 
APPENDIX A:  CHECKLIST FOR SCHOOL ADMINISTRATORS 
These instructions assume that the Office of Equity has already 
been informed of an incident as required, and that a school 
administrator has been instructed to follow this protocol.  
After receiving a report of sexual misconduct, including sexual 
harassment and sexual violence, the school or central office 
administrator (or the elementary or secondary school 
superintendent, elementary or secondary school assistant 
superintendent, and/or operational leader if the complaint is 
against the school or central office administrator) must 
immediately:  
 Receive a disclosure of sexual misconduct. Whoever the 
students report to first must document the following:  
1. Who is the subject of the concern? 
2. What did the subject say or do? 
3. If physical contact was made, where did the subject 
touch you (clarify if contact was made above clothing 
or directly on the student’s skin)? 
4. Is this the first time something like this happened? 
5. Was anyone else there when it happened? 
6. Did you tell anyone else what happened?  
Students cannot be interviewed more than once by a BPS 
employee and should only be interviewed with one adult in 
the room. 
 Assess the need for emergency interim measures and 
implement as appropriate.  


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-03 
Page 14 of 14 
 
 
 
 Report the incident to your school’s Safety Specialist or 
Safety Services at (617) 635-8000 if the allegation involves 
sexual violence, such as physical contact or threats. Call 
Safety Services even if you are not sure if the alleged 
incident constitutes sexual violence. If Safety Services is not 
available, call 911. 
 Contact the Department of Child and Family Services to file 
a 51A report if the allegation warrants. 
 Alert the Operational Leader. In addition, upon request of 
the Office of Equity, alert the school’s elementary or 
secondary school superintendent.  
 Notify the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of the alleged 
target of the misconduct, unless the parent/legal guardian is 
the subject of the investigation and/or such notification will 
create a substantial risk to the student’s health, safety, or 
welfare.  
 Notify the subject’s parent(s) or legal guardian(s) if that 
individual is a minor. 
 Submit Section 1 of the Equity Student Incident & 
Investigation Form within the same school day if possible, 
but always within 48 hours of the incident.   
 Investigate and document the allegations consistent with 
the Office of Equity Protocols to determine if a violation of 
the circular has occurred. If a Code of Conduct violation is 
found, conduct disciplinary proceedings. 
 Submit Section 2 of the Equity Student Incident & 
Investigation Form within 10 days of the incident. 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
EQT-10 
Version 01 
 
 
 
OPPORTUNITY AND ACHIEVEMENT GAPS (OAG) 
POLICY IMPLEMENTATION  
(For the 2016 Policy of the Boston Public Schools to Eliminate 
Opportunity & Achievement Gaps for students of color, 
multilingual learners, students with disabilities and students of 
low socio-economic status)  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
CIRCULAR CONTENTS 
I. 
Opportunity & Achievement Gaps (OAG) Policy Goals 
II. 
OAG Policy Oversight and Implementation 
III. 
OAG Policy SMARTIE Goals / Aligned with Strategic Plan 
Implementation Goals  
a. Superintendent Goals  
b. Central Office Department & Division Goals  
c. School-based Goals  
d. Cross Functional Team Goals  
IV. 
Transparency & Public Accountability  
The Boston Public Schools is committed to ensuring that every 
child in every classroom has unfettered access to all the 
opportunities needed to be successful academically and social 
emotionally. In order to meet this mission, it’s important that 
every district employee reads, understands, embodies, and 
implements the 2016 Opportunity & Achievement Gaps Policy.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
 
 
I. 
OAG POLICY GOALS  
The OAG Policy aspires to achieve the following goals: 
• Goal 1: Districtwide Implementation and Oversight 
• Goal 2: Districtwide Focus on Cultural Proficiency as 
Central to the Work of the Boston Public Schools 
o Objective 2.1: Develop a clear, shared vision for cultural 
proficiency with Cultural Proficiency Standards, and 
promote culturally and linguistically sustaining and 
affirming practices districtwide.  
o Objective 2.2: Continue and expand efforts aimed at 
increasing dialogue and transparency around issues of 
racism and inclusion and create a system for reporting 
allegations of racial bias and discriminatory practices 
through the Office of Equity. 
• Goal 3: Diversity and Cultural Proficiency in Leadership 
and Human Capital 
o Objective 3.1: Increase the diversity of teachers, 
administrators, and staff in schools and the Central 
Office.  
o Objective 3.2: Provide long-term, ongoing professional 
development and coaching for staff at all levels of the 
district on eliminating gaps, transforming and 
improving instructional practices and beliefs, and 
building a culture of high expectations and 
achievement for all students. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
 
• Goal 4: Holistic, Culturally Affirming Approach to School 
and Teacher Quality 
o Objective 4.1: Provide a culturally proficient and highly 
effective teacher in every classroom and give cultural 
proficiency standards greater weight on the Teacher 
Evaluation Rubric.  
o Objective 4.2: Demonstrate how curricula are vetted 
for bias and cultural proficiency and ensure that the 
curriculum and instructional strategies used in all 
subjects at all levels are rigorous, highly engaging, 
culturally affirming, and foster student identity and 
voice. 
o Objective 4.3: Demonstrate how Social and Emotional 
Learning (SEL) is used to develop student identity and 
an appreciation of race, ethnicity, culture, language, 
gender, and social class among students and teachers; 
and foster comfort in discussing these issues explicitly 
in school.  
o Objective 4.4: Demonstrate how assessments are used 
to drive deeper learning, eliminate redundant testing, 
and disaggregate data by ethnicity in addition to race 
and gender to identify and address opportunity and 
achievement gaps.  
o Objective 4.5: Demonstrate how appropriate 
identification, placement, and support services are 
provided for students with disabilities and English 
Language Learners.  
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
 
• Goal 5: Dismantling Structural Barriers and Providing 
Greater Access to Opportunities 
o Objective 5.1: Demonstrate how equity is addressed 
within the district’s operations. 
o Objective 5.2: Demonstrate equity in student 
assignment, enrollment, and school closings. 
o Objective 5.3: Demonstrate equity, quality, and impact 
in funding and resources.  
o Objective 5.4: Demonstrate how opportunities such as 
access to rigorous curriculum, early childhood 
education, and extended learning time are being 
expanded to all students of color and other 
marginalized groups.  
o Objective 5.5: Demonstrate how, in collaboration with 
the City of Boston, BPS fosters strong parent 
community-school ties to mitigate the effects of 
concentrated poverty and institutional racism citywide 
as a strategy to eliminate gaps.  
• Goal 6: Students, Family, and Community as Authentic 
Partners 
o Objective 6.1: Demonstrate how students are engaged 
as partners in eliminating opportunity and 
achievement gaps, while promoting student 
engagement and agency in active learning.  
o Objective 6.2: Demonstrate how parents are engaged 
as partners in eliminating opportunity and 
achievement gaps.  
o Objective 6.3: Demonstrate how community partners 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
 
are engaged with the District to eliminate opportunity 
and achievement gaps. 
II. 
OAG POLICY OVERSIGHT AND IMPLEMENTATION 
The Office of Opportunity Gaps of the Division of Equity, Strategy 
and Opportunity Gaps (ESOG) has the authority to oversee the 
implementation of the OAG policy as designated by the 
superintendent of schools.  
• To ensure that all “departments and schools 
[demonstrate] equity in all facets of district operations,” 
each department and school is expected to develop 
annual goals that advance the goals of the OAG policy 
under their purview.  
• For central office departments, each OAG policy goal 
should be developed in consultation with a designated 
member of the Office of Opportunity Gaps before the 
beginning of each school year.  
• For schools, school leaders, in consultation with their 
school superintendent, should develop goals advancing 
the OAG policy as a part of their annual Quality School 
Plan (QSP). The school superintendents should have the 
goals reviewed by the Office of Opportunity Gaps for 
consultation and feedback for finalization by November 1 
of each year.  
• The Office of Opportunity Gaps and the Office of Strategy 
& Innovation will work in partnership to ensure alignment 
of strategy plan implementation goals and OAG policy 
implementation goals across central office departments. 
Each department's OAG goal(s) shall also serve as one or 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
 
more of its strategic plan implementation goals.   
 
III. 
OAG POLICY SMARTIE GOALS / ALIGNED WITH STRATEGIC 
PLAN IMPLEMENTATION GOALS 
“Implementation and Evaluation: Within six months of the 
Boston School Committee (BSC) adoption of this policy, Boston 
Public Schools (BPS) will develop and present to BSC an 
interdepartmental implementation plan for this policy. The 
Implementation Plan must include SMART Goals which are 
Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic, and Time-Bound. 
Each October, beginning in 2017, BPS will submit an annual 
report on the Plan’s progress which will include SMART Goals for 
the subsequent calendar year. BPS will develop an Opportunity 
and Achievement Gaps (OAG) Dashboard, publicly available on 
the BPS website, which monitors and assesses the District’s 
progress towards meeting the goal of eliminating the 
opportunity and achievement gaps facing students of color and 
other marginalized groups.” 
• Superintendent Goals: At the beginning of each school 
year, the superintendent’s goals, objectives, and 
implementation of activities will be aligned with the goals 
and objectives of the Opportunity and Achievement Gap 
Policy.   
• Central Office Goals:  At the beginning of each fiscal year, 
each division-office must develop an Opportunity and 
Achievement Gap Goal and Strategy(s) that elevates 
student disproportionality within their workstreams. 
Goals are reviewed quarterly to determine progress on 
implementation for student achievement.  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
 
• School-Based Goals: At the beginning of each school year, 
School Leaders and their teams must develop an 
Opportunity and Achievement Gap Goals and 
Strategy(ies) within their Quality School Plans that elevate 
student disproportionalities within teaching, learning, 
operational, and social emotional supports. Quality School 
Plans are reviewed every 90 days to determine progress 
on implementation for student achievement. 
IV. 
TRANSPARENCY & PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY  
“The Boston School Committee must ensure that eliminating the 
opportunity and achievement gaps facing students of color, 
English Language Learners, students with disabilities, and 
students of low socio-economic status is a primary and urgent 
priority that will not change with new leadership, fluctuating 
budgets, and shifting priorities. All District policies, budgets, 
strategic plans, and school improvement plans shall advance 
the goal of eliminating the opportunity and achievement gaps 
facing students of color, English Language Learners, students 
with disabilities, and students of low socio-economic status.”  
RESPONSIBILITY OF DISTRICT LEADERSHIP 
Equity Impact Statements:  
All reports, policy recommendations, and budgets presented to 
the Boston School Committee shall be accompanied by an Equity 
Impact Statement that explicitly shows a comparison of the gaps 
for students of color, multilingual learners, students with 
disabilities, and students of low socio-economic status, 
disaggregated by ethnicity, to the extent possible. This 
Achievement Gap Impact Statement will give an explicit 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
 
examination of how the report, policy recommendation, and/or 
budget will help or hinder eliminating gaps and increase or 
decrease opportunities for students of color, Multilingual learners, 
students with disabilities, and students of low socio-economic 
status.  
All new policies will be automatically reviewed in one year to 
present disaggregated ethnic and program data to show that the 
policy is having its intended impact, along with lessons learned 
and  future recommendations. 
Other Provisions / Excerpts From the OAG Policy: 
• Leadership and Oversight: The superintendent and their 
designee (e.g., the assistant superintendent for the 
Opportunity and Achievement Gap) will have the 
responsibility, authority, and accountability to lead, 
facilitate, and monitor the implementation of this policy 
so that it is fully embedded in the operations and 
practices of the district.   
• Resource Allocation: BPS shall base resource allocation 
decisions on the OAG Implementation Plan, and target 
resources to meet the specific gap closing goals of the 
plan, including fully funding the Office of the Opportunity 
and Achievement Gap and the Office of Equity. As part of 
the annual report, BPS will indicate the resources it has 
allocated to implement the OAG plan.  
• Monitoring: The Opportunity and Achievement Gaps Task 
Force shall continue as a monitoring body, meeting no 
less than quarterly, providing guidance and input, and 
working in partnership with the Boston School 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
 
Committee, and BPS to help ensure that the 
Implementation Plan is developed, and the policy is being 
implemented with consistency and fidelity across the 
district. The task force will give an annual State of the 
Opportunity and Achievement Gaps Report to the Boston 
School Committee and shall make recommendations as 
needed to influence the budget process and planning for 
each subsequent school year. 
• Performance Reviews: Beginning in SY22-23, annual 
performance reviews for the superintendent and all BPS 
staff shall include goals related to cultural proficiency and 
eliminating opportunity and achievement gaps.  
 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-10 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Assistant Superintendent, Office of 
Opportunity Gaps 
Department: 
Office of Opportunity Gaps  
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
OR 
Owner: 
Assistant Superintendent, Office of 
Opportunity Gaps 
Department: 
Equity Strategy, Opportunity Gaps  
Mailing Address: Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
EQT-05 
Version 01 
 
 
 
BIAS-BASED CONDUCT TOWARD EMPLOYEES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
PURPOSE 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to maintaining a 
workplace free of bias-based conduct and discrimination where 
all employees can flourish.  
The Boston Public Schools utilizes the procedures outlined in this 
circular to investigate and resolve reports of alleged violations of 
the district’s nondiscrimination policy (see EQT-01). These 
procedures are designed to facilitate a prompt and effective 
internal review and resolution of allegations of bias-based 
conduct, discrimination or harassment based on race, color, age, 
criminal record (inquiries only), disability, sex/gender, gender 
identity, religion, national origin, ancestry, retaliation, sexual 
orientation, genetics, natural or protective hairstyle, or military 
status. The intent of these procedures is to ensure that, to the 
greatest extent possible, such reports are addressed in a 
constructive manner. 
COVERAGE 
The procedures pertain solely to reports explicitly alleging bias-
based conduct, discrimination, or harassment based on race, 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-05 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 
 
color, age, criminal records (inquiries only), disability, 
pregnancy/pregnancy related conditions, sex/gender, gender 
identity, religion, national origin, ancestry, retaliation, sexual 
orientation, genetics, natural or protective hairstyle, or military 
status. Behavior that occurs in a location other than a Boston 
Public Schools building or outside of BPS school or work hours, 
including when an employee is working remotely, may still 
constitute bias-based misconduct and a violation of this policy if 
that behavior has the effect of disrupting an employee’s ability to 
do their job. 
Employees sometimes experience “microaggressions”: verbal or 
nonverbal communication that is rooted in implicit bias, but does 
not rise to the level of a violation of this circular. Examples 
include: 
• Mistaking one staff member for another because they share 
the same racial identity 
• Complimenting a staff member for having a skill that is 
counter to a stereotype regarding their gender or ethnicity 
• Assuming a staff member observes a particular religious 
holiday or has a particular sexual orientation 
• Asking a staff member about their disability without their 
consent. 
When microaggressions are reported to the Office of Equity, the 
Office will partner with the reporter and/or other appropriate 
staff to determine an effective intervention, such as coaching, 
mediation, restorative justice, or an individual or school- or 
department-wide training.  


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-05 
Page 3 of 8 
 
 
 
GENERAL POLICIES 
1. Employees in supervisory or managerial roles have an 
obligation to report possible violations of this circular. 
2. Retaliation against any employee for reporting or 
participating in any way in the reporting or investigative 
procedures is strictly prohibited. 
3. Whenever possible, investigatory meetings will be 
scheduled during a mutually convenient time that does not 
conflict with regularly scheduled school programs. 
4. Reporting a possible violation will not be construed as 
reflecting unfavorably on an employee’s or applicant’s good 
standing, performance, loyalty, or desirability to the Boston 
Public Schools. 
5. Information regarding the allegations, including the parties 
involved in the report and the investigation, will be kept 
confidential to the extent practicable. 
6. In determining whether the alleged conduct constitutes a 
violation of the BPS nondiscrimination policy, the 
Superintendent or their designee will consider the 
surrounding circumstances, the nature of the behavior, the 
relationships between the parties, and the context in which 
the incidents occurred. A determination whether a 
particular action or incident constitutes a violation of the 
policy will be based on all the facts. 
PROCEDURES 
1. An employee or applicant who believes they may have 
experienced, witnessed, or become aware of possible bias-
based conduct must contact the Office of Equity by phone, 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-05 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 
 
email, or fax. Employees are strongly encouraged to contact 
the Office of Equity as soon after the incident as possible, as 
reports are more easily addressed the sooner they are 
reported. A member of the Office of Equity staff will ask the 
reporter for information regarding the incident(s) and may 
request that the reporter submit a written statement. The 
Office of Equity will ensure that assistance is provided in 
preparing such a written statement, if needed. The Office of 
Equity accepts all reports of possible bias-based conduct 
but, depending on the circumstances, may decline to 
investigate allegations regarding incidents that occurred 
more than 300 calendar days prior to receipt of the report. 
2. Employees in a supervisory capacity are required to report 
possible bias-based conduct toward or involving employees, 
vendors, or contractors to the Office of Equity as soon as 
practicable, generally within the same school day. 
3. After a report is received, the Office of Equity will notify the 
appropriate department identified in the report and/or the 
individual against whom the report has been filed.  
4. The Office of Equity will make a fair, impartial, thorough, and 
prompt investigation of the reported incident(s). The 
investigation may include interviews with individuals who 
have pertinent information and a review of any documents 
or other information relevant to the investigation. BPS 
employees are obligated to cooperate with any Equity 
investigation, including promptly providing any requested 
information or documents. 
5. The individual who reported alleged bias-based conduct 
and any subjects of the investigation will be informed when 
the investigation is complete, and informed whether 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-05 
Page 5 of 8 
 
 
 
prohibited conduct was found. Depending on the facts 
gathered, the Office of Equity may resolve the concerns by 
applying approaches such as alternative dispute resolution, 
restorative justice, training, or coaching. In other instances, 
the results of the investigation may also be documented as 
written findings. Mediation will not be used in cases 
involving sexual assault. 
6. If the Office of Equity finds that there is a preponderance of 
evidence to show that a violation of the district’s 
nondiscrimination policy occurred, the office will determine 
ways to address the matter and prevent recurrences. 
7. The Office of Equity will maintain records of all reports of 
bias-based conduct made to the Office of Equity, noting the 
school or department in which the alleged incident(s) 
occurred, the person accused, and the results of the 
investigation. The Office of Equity may review its records to 
identify any patterns and take appropriate action as 
necessary.  
The Office of Equity will: 
1. Take seriously all concerns regarding possible bias-based 
conduct. 
2. Take necessary steps to end any conduct determined to be 
in violation of the district’s nondiscrimination policy, prevent 
this conduct from recurring in the future, and remedy its 
effects, where appropriate.  
3. Refer individuals found to have violated the district’s 
nondiscrimination policy for disciplinary action when 
appropriate.  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-05 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 
 
For employees, such action may include written warning, 
suspension, termination, or another action deemed 
appropriate under the circumstances. (For more information 
about Employee Discipline Procedures, please see 
Superintendent Circular HRS-PP10.) 
For students, such action may include suspension, 
expulsion, or another action deemed appropriate under the 
circumstances. (For more information on student discipline, 
please see the Code of Discipline for Students and Students 
with Disabilities – Superintendent Circulars SUP-05 and SPE-
15.)  
4. Require students, employees, or other third parties found to 
violate the district’s nondiscrimination policy to attend 
discrimination prevention training, as appropriate. 
STATE AND FEDERAL REMEDIES 
In addition to the above, if you believe you have been subjected 
to unlawful discrimination, you may file a formal complaint with 
either of the government agencies set forth below. Reporting a 
concern to the Office of Equity does not prohibit you from filing a 
complaint with these agencies. Each of the agencies has a time 
period of 300 days for filing a claim. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-05 
Page 7 of 8 
 
 
 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) 
John F. Kennedy Federal Building 
475 Government Center 
Boston, MA 02203 
(800) 660-4000 
 
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (MCAD) 
Office Location: 
Address: 
Boston 
One Ashburton Place, Room 601 
Boston, MA 02108 
(617) 994-6000 
Springfield 
436 Dwight Street, Suite 220 
Springfield, MA 01103 
(413) 739-2145 
New Bedford 
 
800 Purchase Street, Room 501 
New Bedford, MA 02740  
(508) 990-2390 
Worcester 
484 Main Street, Room 320 
Worcester, MA 01608 
(508) 453-9630 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-05 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Training and School Support 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., 5th floor, Roxbury, MA 
02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
Email: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
EQT-09  
Version 01 
 
 
 
TRANSGENDER AND GENDER NONCONFORMING 
EMPLOYEE NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF 
GENDER IDENTITY AND EXPRESSION 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version.  
The Boston Public Schools is committed to maintaining a 
workplace free of bias-based conduct and discrimination where 
all employees can flourish. All Boston Public Schools are to be 
free from bias and discrimination on the basis of sex, sexual 
orientation, and/or gender identity. 
This circular sets forth guidelines to address the needs of 
transgender and gender non-conforming employees and clarifies 
the Office of Equity’s investigatory process. This circular does not 
anticipate every situation that might occur with respect to 
transgender or gender non-conforming employees, and the 
needs of each transgender or gender non-conforming employee 
must be assessed on a case-by-case basis.  
Reports of bias, discrimination or harassment based on a person’s 
actual or perceived gender identity or gender nonconformity are 
handled in the same manner as other reports of bias-based 
conduct. Students, employees, and third parties alleged to have 
violated this policy (EQT-09) will be investigated and addressed 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-09 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 
 
according to the protocols detailed in Superintendent’s Circular 
EQT-05, “Employee Reports of Bias-Based Conduct.” 
DEFINITIONS 
The definitions provided below are not intended to label or limit 
employees’ individual identities or experiences, but rather to 
assist in understanding this circular and the district’s legal 
obligations. Although these are the most commonly used terms, 
employees may or may not choose to use these terms to describe 
their gender identity, appearance, or behavior. 
 
 
• Gender Identity: Defined under Massachusetts law as “a 
person’s gender-related identity, appearance, or behavior, 
whether or not that gender-related identity, appearance, or 
behavior is different from that traditionally associated with 
the person’s physiology or assigned sex at birth.”  
• Gender Expression: The way a person represents or 
expresses gender to others, often through behavior, 
clothing, hairstyles, activities, voice, or mannerisms. 
 
 
• Transgender: A person whose gender identity or expression 
is different from that traditionally associated with the 
assigned sex at birth. 
 
 
 
 
 
• Gender Nonconforming: People whose gender identity 
and/or gender expression do not conform to traditional 
societal expectations or norms. The terms “gender 
nonbinary,” “gender variant,” or “gender-atypical” may also 
be used.  
 
 
 
 
• Queer: While historically and sometimes currently 
considered an offensive term, “queer” has been reclaimed 
by many members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-09 
Page 3 of 8 
 
 
 
transgender (LGBT) community as a term of empowerment. 
The term generally refers to a member of the LGBT and/or 
gender nonconforming community. This term may be used 
by someone who identifies as a member of the LGBT 
community, but who does not specifically consider 
themselves to be lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender. 
Since this term has a negative history, it should only be used 
to describe individuals who identify themselves as queer 
and give permission for others to use that term to describe 
them. 
 
 
 
 
 
• Transition: The process by which a person goes from living 
and identifying as one gender to living and identifying as 
another. Transitions may include physical, social, and/or 
medical processes. Not all transgender or gender 
nonconforming people transition or desire to transition in 
the same way. Transitions are private, and personal 
information about a transition should not be discussed 
unless the conversation is initiated and led by the 
transgender or gender-nonconforming employee.  
RESPONSIBILITIES 
The Boston Public Schools Office of Equity is responsible for 
ensuring compliance with this circular and ensuring that all 
school administrators and Central Office department heads are 
trained and prepared to comply with their obligations under this 
circular. 
PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
Transgender and gender nonconforming employees have the 
right to discuss their gender identity or expression openly or 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-09 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 
 
keep that information private. The employee has the right to 
decide when, with whom, and how much to share when 
speaking about their identity or expression.  
BPS Central Office employees, school personnel, and other 
parties employed, contracted by, or serving as volunteers in the 
district should not disclose information that may reveal an 
employee’s transgender status or gender nonconforming 
presentation to others without their express permission. Private 
and confidential information may only be shared with the 
transgender employee’s consent, and with employees who truly 
need to know to execute their job requirements.  
DRESS AND APPEARANCE 
Boston Public Schools does not have dress codes that restrict 
employees’ clothing or appearance on the basis of gender. 
Transgender and gender nonconforming employees have the 
right to dress in a manner consistent with their gender identity 
and/or gender expression.  
NAMES AND PRONOUNS 
An employee has the right to be addressed by the name and 
pronoun that corresponds to the employee’s gender identity in 
the workplace, including by their colleagues, and for school-
based employees, by their students. A court-ordered name or 
gender change is not required. The intentional refusal to respect 
an employee’s gender identity may constitute a violation of the 
district’s circular, Bias-Based Conduct Toward Employees (EQT-
05) and/or state and federal anti-discrimination laws. If a district 
employee is unsure what pronoun a staff member uses, they 
should ask the employee how they would like to be addressed. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-09 
Page 5 of 8 
 
 
 
PUBLIC FACILITIES ACCESSIBILITY 
Employees have a right to access safe and appropriate facilities, 
including the right to use a restroom and/or locker room that 
corresponds to the employee’s gender identity, regardless of the 
employee’s sex assigned at birth. Any employee who has a need 
or desire for increased privacy will be provided access to a single-
stall restroom and/or private area, if available. No employee 
should be required to use a single-stall restroom or a private 
changing area.  
TRANSITIONING AT BPS 
Employees who transition during their BPS employment can 
expect the support of the Office of Human Capital and the Office 
of Equity. These two offices will work with each transitioning 
employee individually to ensure a successful workplace 
transition.  
BEFORE THE WORKPLACE TRANSITION BEGINS 
Transitioning employees are encouraged to work in partnership 
with the Office of Equity and Office of Human Capital to learn 
more about the district’s transgender-related policies, and the 
availability of transition-related health care benefits. 
 
All relevant parties should discuss a workplace transition plan, 
including the employee, the employee’s supervisor, and others as 
appropriate. A work plan should specify: 
• The date selected by the employee for when the transition 
will officially and formally take place. This date will 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-09 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 
 
correspond to the date the employee changes their gender 
expression, name, and pronouns. Employees may also 
choose to start using the bathroom and other facilities that 
correspond to their gender identity on this date. The 
employee has the right to revise the start date and other 
aspects of the plan based on their evolving needs and 
preferences. 
• How and in what format the transitioning employee will 
notify co-workers or personnel who need to know.  
• What, if any, training will be provided to co-workers, 
students, or other appropriate personnel or families.  
• What updates should be made to the transitioning 
employee’s records, and when they will be made.  
• The dates of any leaves that may be needed for pre-
scheduled medical procedures or treatment, if applicable. 
BIAS-BASED CONDUCT, DISCRIMINATION, AND HARASSMENT 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to maintaining a 
workplace free of bias-based conduct and discrimination where 
all employees can flourish.  
 
Reports of bias, discrimination, or harassment based on a 
person’s actual or perceived gender identity or gender 
nonconformity are handled in the same manner as other reports 
of bias-based conduct. The Boston Public Schools utilizes the 
procedures outlined in EQT-05, Bias-Based Conduct Toward 
Employees. These procedures are designed to facilitate a prompt 
and effective internal review and resolution of allegations of bias-


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-09 
Page 7 of 8 
 
 
 
based conduct, discrimination, or harassment based on 
sex/gender, gender identity, gender expression, and sexual 
orientation.  
RELATED RESOURCES 
• Links to laws, regulations, cases, and web sources on 
gender identity or expression law can be found at 
Massachusetts Law About Gender Identity or Expression. 
• Contact the Office of Equity at 617-635-9650 or 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org for information about 
additional training and support.  
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-09 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner:  
Director of Training and School Support 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., 5th Floor, Roxbury, 
MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9291 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
Email: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
OIIT-03 
Version 01 
 
TECHNOLOGY PURCHASING, DONATIONS &  
RETURN GUIDE 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
PURPOSE 
This document is intended to provide guidance on the 
technology purchasing process, acceptance of technology 
donations, and the return of technology.  
TECHNOLOGY PURCHASING 
All requests to procure technology that must be added to the 
BPS network should be submitted to BPSTechnology (OIIT) 
through the Technology Purchasing Request (Form 40), 
regardless of funding source. Please visit the BPSTechnology 
Purchasing Menu for technology options, pricing, and the 
request form. If you’re not sure if a request form should be 
submitted, please feel free to reach out.  
Technology listed on the menu has been evaluated by 
BPSTechnology (OIIT) experts based on industry standards, 
district priorities, and school needs. Most technologies come with 
the standard BPS image, and we guarantee service and support 
for the equipment. Competitive pricing has been negotiated with 
vendors, contracts are already in place, and BPS purchasing 
guidelines have been met.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-03 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
If you do not find what you are looking for on the menu, please 
reach out. While most technologies are standardized across the 
district, we may be able to get them with different specifications 
(i.e. memory, storage). If you are considering technology that 
cannot be supported by BPSTechnology (OIIT), please:  
• examine compatibility with existing systems and digital 
applications, 
• be conscious of any software licensing or subscriptions 
needed, 
• understand the warranty coverage and how repairs will be 
handled,  
• ensure training is available on use and integration of the 
technology,  
• arrange for shipment, delivery, assembly, and installation if 
necessary,  
• follow the procurement process (see Business Services 
Guide), and 
• plan ahead to meet implementation and procurement 
timelines. 
BPSTechnology (OIIT) reserves the right to decline requests for 
the procurement of technology.  
Before submitting your request, please be sure sufficient funding 
is available in technology accounts (55903, 55905, and 55907). If 
paying by check/BEDF, please wait to make payment. 
BPSTechnology (OIIT) will provide you with payment instructions 
once the request has been reviewed and approved. 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-03 
Page 3 of 5 
 
Only school/department leaders who are authorized by the 
superintendent to make budget decisions can submit requests 
to purchase technology. However, we encourage staff to work 
with leaders to make technology decisions that will benefit 
schools/departments as a whole. 
Public funds cannot be used to provide a prize or gift to an 
individual. Under the Anti-Aid Amendment of our State 
Constitution and by order of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial 
Court, money raised by taxation (i.e., public money) can be used 
only for public purposes and not for the advantage of private 
individuals. 
DONATIONS 
Schools receiving technology donations from outside vendors or 
partners should contact BPSTechnology (OIIT) prior to receipt for 
a comprehensive consultation. Donations can differ from 
BPSTechnology (OIIT) standards but must meet the minimum 
system requirements for the device. All donations of technology 
are the property of the Boston Public Schools and, as such, must 
adhere to the same policies regarding purchased equipment. 
After consultation, BPSTechnology (OIIT) reserves the right to 
decline donations if they do not meet the minimum system 
requirements or require additional support or resources beyond 
the means of the district. 
There may be additional costs associated with software, re-
imaging, repair, and maintenance. All donated computers must 
be re-imaged with the standard image before being used by 
students or staff to ensure that existing data/information can be 
removed, and the necessary security and management software 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-03 
Page 4 of 5 
 
can be installed.   
Materials funded through DonorsChoose.org are the property of 
the public school at which the teacher is employed when 
resources are shipped. The teacher who created the project is the 
sole steward of the donation while employed at the school, 
carrying out the project for which the materials were donated. 
For more information, go to DonorsChoose.Org Materials 
Ownership Policy. 
RETURNS 
All technology (laptops, desktops, cell phones, tablets, desk 
phones, etc.) must be returned to BPSTechnology (OIIT) for 
reimaging or recycling. Any BPSTechnology (OIIT) staff member 
at either the Bolling Building or Campbell Resource Center can 
collect technology and provide an electronic receipt to the 
employee and RC manager, if requested. If re-imaged, the device 
is held until the purchasing school/department reassigns the unit 
and/or provides us with further instruction.   
Technology cannot be transferred from one employee to another. 
All computers, phones, and tablets must be returned to 
BPSTechnology (OIIT) so that data can be properly archived and 
destroyed before it is redistributed to another employee. Hard 
drive contents will be archived according to the City of Boston 
Records Retention Schedule by the director of records 
management. Once data is archived and destroyed, the RC 
manager can direct BPSTechnology (OIIT) to redeploy the 
technology to another employee in their RC. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-03 
Page 5 of 5 
 
Name: 
Director of Technology Business Operations 
Department: 
OIIT / BPS Technology 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9190 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
OIIT-02 
Version 01 
 
 
 
PROCURING DIGITAL PRODUCTS GUIDANCE 
DOCUMENT 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
PURPOSE 
This document is intended to provide guidance to Boston Public 
Schools (BPS) staff on the process to procure new digital learning 
technologies that use student education records or staff 
information. The overarching guidance is that schools and central 
office departments should continue to use already-vetted digital 
products that are included with the Google Enterprise suite of 
tools or those that are included in Clever. 
DEFINITIONS 
Digital Tool - Any digital products or learning tools that are used 
to enhance or improve workflows that do not store or maintain 
data/information. Examples include applications like 
Smartsheets, Chrome Extensions, or personal notation tools. 
These tools are exempt from this circular. 
System - Any digital platform that purposely built to store, 
maintain, or transfer sensitive student or staff data/information. 
Examples include Aspen or EdPlan. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-02 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
 
Platform - A suite of tools and programs that allow users to 
create structures to maintain information. Examples include 
Google Apps, Salesforce, or Wordpress. 
Learning Application - Any digital tool used in a classroom 
setting that may contain content and student 
information/progress. Learning applications may fall into multiple 
categories, depending on how they are used, but any tool that 
contains content and tracks student learning should be 
considered a learning app for the purpose of this document. 
Examples include Imagine Learning. 
CONTEXT 
BPS staff seeking online learning products or receiving offers to 
use online learning products to support instruction in a digital 
space has resulted in the desire to use products that may not be 
aligned to BPS instructional standards, do not comply with our 
technical specifications, or do not adhere to data sharing 
guidelines under FERPA. Our district is committed to ensuring 
that appropriate educational supports and effective learning 
opportunities are provided to students. As such, this document 
will outline guidance for the appropriate review of digital 
learning tools in BPS. The guidelines outlined below are created 
to ensure that product confidentiality and security practices 
meet or exceed industry standards and adhere to the 
expectations contained in the federal Family Education Rights 
and Privacy Act (FERPA), the Children’s Online Privacy Protection 
Act (COPPA), the Protection of Pupil Rights Amendment (PPRA), 
and HIPAA regulations. This document describes the 
considerations schools and central office staff should employ 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-02 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
 
around protecting student data and education records, when 
selecting digital learning tools.  
GUIDANCE FOR BPS STAFF PROCURING DIGITAL PRODUCTS  
Any tools or products that are procured (paid for or free) by 
schools or departments for schoolwide or districtwide use need 
to comply with the FERPA school official exception criteria1 and 
specifications for technical interoperability. Exceptions are made 
for tools that do not track/store/maintain student or staff 
information. For example, a Chrome Extension that magnifies the 
screen does not fall under these guidelines since it will not be 
 
1 Performs an institutional service or function for which the 
educational agency or institution would otherwise use its own 
employees; 
Has been determined to meet the criteria set forth in in the 
educational agency’s or institution’s annual notification of 
FERPA rights for being a school official with a legitimate 
educational interest in the education records or PII; 
Is under the direct control of the educational agency or 
institution regarding the use and maintenance of the education 
records or PII; and 
Uses the education records or PII only for authorized purposes 
and does not re-disclose the education records or PII to other 
parties (unless the provider has specific authorization from the 
educational agency or institution to do so and it is otherwise 
permitted by FERPA). See 34 CFR §99.31(a)(1)(i). 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-02 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
 
accessing any sensitive information. New requests for products 
should: 
1. Meet the district’s technical specifications 
2. Have signed or sign a data privacy agreement  
3. Aligned to the Essentials for Instructional Equity  
4. Serve a purpose that is distinct from currently available tools 
within the district. 
PROCESS FOR SUBMITTING A SPENDING APPROVAL FOR THE 
DIGITAL LEARNING PRODUCT 
Before a new digital learning product will be integrated, the 
following steps need to be completed: 
1. Review the Essentials for Instructional Equity for alignment. 
2. Have the vendor submit an NDA Request to receive and sign 
the MA Student Data Privacy Agreement and Technology 
Specifications Template. 
3. Once fully executed, follow the procurement process as 
outlined in the BUSINESS SERVICES GUIDE. 
4. Once the product is procured, email the BPS Clever Admin 
at cleveradmin@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-02 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Director of Technology 
Department: 
Office of Instructional and Information 
Technology, Office of Data & Accountability 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9200 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
OIIT-01 
Version 01 
 
ACCEPTABLE USE POLICY AND GUIDELINES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
Guidelines for Implementation of Acceptable Use Policy for 
Digital Information, Communication, and Technology Resources 
SCOPE OF POLICY 
Boston Public Schools (BPS) provides access to technology 
devices, Internet, and data systems to employees and students 
for educational and business purposes.  This Acceptable Use 
Policy (AUP) governs all electronic activity of employees using 
and accessing the district’s technology, internet, and data 
systems regardless of the user’s physical location. 
GUIDING PRINCIPLES 
• Online tools, including social media, should be used in our 
classrooms, schools, and central offices to increase 
community engagement, staff and student learning, and 
core operational efficiency. 
• BPS has a legal and moral obligation to protect the personal 
data of our students, families, and staff. 
• BPS should provide a baseline set of policies and structures 
to allow schools to implement technology in ways that meet 
the needs of their students. All students, families, and staff 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 2 of 13 
 
must know their rights and responsibilities outlined in the 
Acceptable Use Policy and government regulations. 
• Nothing in this policy shall be read to limit an individual’s 
constitutional rights to freedom of speech or expression or 
to restrict an employee’s ability to engage in concerted, 
protected activity with fellow employees regarding the 
terms and conditions of their employment.   
COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENT FOR EMPLOYEES 
The Acceptable Use Policy is reviewed annually by the BPS Chief 
Information Officer and is issued via the Superintendent’s 
Circular.  Technology users are required to verify that they have 
read and will abide by the Acceptable Use Policy annually. 
STUDENT AUP & CONTRACT 
Copies of the Acceptable Use Policy and the student contract for 
Internet use are included in the Guide to Boston Public Schools 
for Families & Students, given to all students at the beginning of 
the school year. The Student Contract for Internet Use must be 
completed and signed by all students and their parent/guardian 
after going over the AUP together. The signed contract must be 
returned to the school before the student may begin using the 
Internet.  
CONSEQUENCES OF BREACH OF POLICY 
Use of all BPS technology resources is a privilege, not a right. By 
using BPS internet systems and devices, the user agrees to follow 
all BPS regulations, policies, and guidelines.  Students and staff 
are encouraged to report misuse or breach of protocols to 
appropriate personnel, including building administrators, direct 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 3 of 13 
 
supervisors, and the Office of Instructional and Information 
Technology (OIIT).  Abuse of these privileges may result in one or 
more of the following consequences: 
• Suspension or cancellation of use or access privileges. 
• Payments for damages or repairs. 
• Discipline under appropriate School Department policies, up 
to and including termination of employment, subject to any 
collective bargaining obligations. 
• Liability under applicable civil or criminal laws. 
DEFINITIONS 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) - The FOIA is a law that allows 
for the release of government documents at the request of an 
individual. A FOIA request can be made to the Boston Public 
Schools for electronic documents/communications stored or 
transmitted through district systems unless that information 
could be detrimental to governmental or personal interests. For 
more information, visit http://www.foia.gov/ 
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) - The FERPA 
law protects the privacy, accuracy, and release of information for 
students and families of the Boston Public Schools. Personal 
information stored or transmitted by agents of the Boston Public 
Schools must abide by FERPA laws and the BPS is required to 
protect the integrity and security of student and family 
information. For more information, visit 
http://www.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/fpco/ferpa/index.html 
Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA) - Requires schools that 
receive federal funding through the E-Rate program to protect 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 4 of 13 
 
students from content deemed harmful or inappropriate. The 
Boston Public Schools is required to filter internet access for 
inappropriate content, monitor the internet usage of minors, and 
provide education to students and staff on safe and appropriate 
online behavior. 
COMMUNICATION & SOCIAL MEDIA 
Employees and students are provided with district email 
accounts and online tools to improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of communication, both within the organization 
and with the broader community. Communication should be 
consistent with professional practices used for all 
correspondence. When using online tools, members of the BPS 
community will use appropriate behavior: 
a) when acting as a representative or employee of the Boston 
Public Schools. 
b) when the communication impacts or is likely to impact the 
classroom or working environment in the Boston Public 
Schools. 
All communication sent by an employee using district property 
or regarding district business could be subjected to public access 
requests submitted through Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). 
Users need to be aware that data and other material/files 
maintained on the school district’s systems may be subject to 
review, disclosure, or discovery. Use of personal email accounts 
and communication tools to conduct school business is strongly 
discouraged and may open an individual’s personal account to 
be subject to FOIA inquiries. BPS will cooperate fully with local, 
state, and federal authorities in any investigation concerning or 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 5 of 13 
 
related to any illegal activities or activities not in compliance with 
school district policies or government regulations. 
GUIDELINES FOR ONLINE COMMUNICATION 
• Communication with students should not include content 
of a personal nature. 
• When communicating with parents/guardians of students, 
employees should use email addresses and phone numbers 
listed in the Student Information System (SIS) unless steps 
have been taken to verify that the communication is 
occurring with a parent/guardian that has educational 
rights for the student. 
• When communicating with a parent/guardian, refrain from 
discussing any non-related students when possible. 
• Employees who use internal or external social media (blogs, 
X/Twitter, etc.) are expected to refrain from discussing 
confidential information and/or discussing specific students. 
Information that can be traced back to a specific student or 
could allow a student to be publicly identified should not be 
posted on any social media sites. 
• When using social media, employees are expected to refrain 
from posting any negative comments online about 
students. 
• Employees are required to notify their principal/headmaster 
before setting up an online site to facilitate student learning. 
Employees are encouraged to monitor/moderate online 
communication to the best of their abilities.  
• Employees are advised not to add any students/former 
students or parents as ‘friends’ or contacts on social media 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 6 of 13 
 
unless the site is specifically set up to support classroom 
instruction or school business. 
• Employees may communicate with BPS graduates (+18 
years old) on social media but should be advised to maintain 
professionalism and caution when communicating online. 
• Employees are advised not to add parents/guardians of 
students as ‘friends’ or contacts on social media to maintain 
professionalism and to avoid any appearance of conflict of 
interest. 
• Avoid responding to spam or phishing attempts that require 
a user to click on any links or to provide any account 
information. Note: BPS will never ask for a user’s account 
password for any purpose. Users are advised to report any 
suspicious requests for account information directly to the 
OIIT Help Desk (617-635-9200). 
SOLICITATION 
Web announcements and online communication promoting a 
business are prohibited by the BPS Solicitation Policy. The 
Superintendent’s Office may make exceptions if benefits are 
judged sufficient to merit exception. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 7 of 13 
 
USE OF COPYRIGHTED MATERIALS 
Violations of copyright law that occur while using the BPS 
network or other resources are prohibited and have the potential 
to create liability for the district as well as for the individual. BPS 
staff and students must comply with regulations on copyright 
plagiarism that govern the use of material accessed through the 
BPS network.   
Users will refrain from using materials obtained online without 
requesting permission from the owner if the use of the material 
has the potential of being considered copyright infringement. 
BPS will cooperate with copyright protection agencies 
investigating copyright infringement by users of the computer 
systems and network of the Boston Public Schools. 
NETWORK USAGE 
Network access and bandwidth are provided to schools for 
academic and operational services. BPS reserves the right to 
prioritize network bandwidth and limit certain network activities 
that are negatively impacting academic and operational services. 
Users are prohibited from using the BPS network to access 
content that is inappropriate or illegal, including but not limited 
to content that is pornographic, obscene, illegal, or promotes 
violence. 
NETWORK FILTERING & MONITORING 
As required in the Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA), BPS 
is required to protect students from online threats, block access 
to inappropriate content, and monitor Internet use by minors on 
school networks. OIIT is responsible for managing the district’s 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 8 of 13 
 
Internet filter and will work with the BPS community to ensure 
the filter meets the academic and operational needs of each 
school while protecting minors from inappropriate content. 
By authorizing use of technology resources, BPS does not 
relinquish control over materials on the systems or contained in 
files on the systems.  There is no expectation of privacy related to 
information stored or transmitted over the BPS network or in 
BPS systems. BPS reserves the right to access, review, copy, store, 
or delete any files (unless other restrictions apply) stored on BPS 
computers and all employee and student communications using 
the BPS network. Electronic messages and files stored on BPS 
computers or transmitted using BPS systems may be treated like 
any other school property. District administrators and network 
personnel may review files and messages to maintain system 
integrity and, if necessary, to ensure that users are acting 
responsibly. BPS may choose to deploy location tracking software 
on devices for the sole purpose of locating devices identified as 
lost or stolen. 
PERSONAL USE 
BPS recognizes that users may use BPS email, devices, and 
network bandwidth for limited personal use; however, personal 
use should not interfere with or impede district business and/or 
cause additional financial burden on the district.  Excessive use or 
abuse of these privileges can be deemed in violation of the 
Acceptable Use Policy.  
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 9 of 13 
 
NETWORK SECURITY 
The BPS Wide Area Network (WAN) infrastructure, as well as the 
building-based Local Area Networks (LANs) are implemented 
with performance planning and appropriate security measures in 
mind. Modifications to an individual building network 
infrastructure and/or use will affect LAN performance and will 
reduce the efficiency of the WAN. For this reason, any additional 
network electronics including, but not limited to, switches, 
routers, and wireless access points must be approved, purchased, 
installed, and configured solely by OIIT to ensure the safety and 
efficiency of the network. Users are prohibited from altering or 
bypassing security measures on electronic devices, network 
equipment, and other software/online security measures without 
the written consent of the chief information officer. 
DATA & SYSTEMS 
Access to view, edit, or share personal data on students and 
employees maintained by BPS central offices, individual schools, 
or by persons acting for the district must abide by local, state, 
and federal regulations, including the Family Educational Rights 
and Privacy Act. Student and staff information and data may only 
be shared with individuals deemed eligible to have access by the 
person(s) responsible for oversight of that data. Outside parties 
and/or non-BPS individuals requesting protected data must 
receive approval from the Office of the Legal Advisor and have a 
non-disclosure agreement with the BPS. Individuals requesting 
ongoing access to data through BPS systems are required to 
have a designated BPS administrator who will act as a “sponsor” 
to ensure the safety of the data. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 10 of 13 
 
ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION OF DATA 
When educational records or private data are transmitted or 
shared electronically, staff are expected to protect the privacy of 
the data by password-protecting the record/file and only using 
BPS systems to transmit data. Staff are also expected to ensure 
records are sent only to individuals with a right to said records 
and must take reasonable measures to ensure that only the 
intended recipients are able to access the data. 
PASSWORDS 
Users are required to adhere to password requirements set forth 
by the Boston Public Schools and the City of Boston when 
logging into school computers, networks, and online systems. 
Users are not authorized to share their password and must use 
extra caution to avoid email scams that request passwords or 
other personal information. 
MEDIA & STORAGE 
All local media (USB devices, hard drives, CDs, flash drives, etc.) 
with sensitive data must be securely protected with a password 
and/or encrypted to ensure the safety of the data contained. Use 
of cloud-storage services for storage or transmission of files 
containing sensitive information must be approved by the Office 
of the Legal Advisor and OIIT. Users are encouraged to use BPS 
approved data/information systems for the storage and 
transmission of sensitive data whenever possible and avoid 
storage on local hardware that cannot be secured. 
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 11 of 13 
 
ELECTRONIC DEVICES 
BPS defines electronic devices as, but not limited to, the 
following: 
• Laptop and desktop computers, including like-devices 
• Tablets 
• Wireless email and text-messaging devices, i.e., iPod 
• Smartphones 
• Donated devices 
DEVICE SUPPORT 
BPS provides basic installation, synchronization, and software 
support for BPS-issued electronic devices. Devices must be 
connected to the BPS network on a regular basis to receive up-
to-date software and antivirus updates and for inventory 
purposes. Password protection is required on all BPS-issued 
electronic devices to prevent unauthorized use in the event of 
loss or theft. Users are responsible for making periodic backups 
of data files stored locally on their devices. 
LOSS/THEFT 
Users must take reasonable measures to prevent a device from 
being lost or stolen. In the event an electronic device is lost or 
stolen, the user is required to immediately notify appropriate 
school staff and/or their direct supervisor, local authorities, and 
the OIIT Service Desk (617-635-9200). The BPS will take all 
reasonable measures to recover the lost property and to ensure 
the security of any information contained on the device. 
RETURN OF ELECTRONIC DEVICES 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 12 of 13 
 
All technology purchased or donated to the BPS is considered 
district property, and all equipment assigned to employees or 
students must be returned prior to leaving their position or 
school. All equipment containing sensitive information and data 
must be returned directly to OIIT before it can be redeployed. 
PERSONAL ELECTRONIC DEVICES 
The use of personal electronic devices is permitted at the 
discretion of the principal/head of school and chief information 
officer. The BPS is not responsible for the maintenance and 
security of personal electronic devices and assumes no 
responsibility for loss or theft. The district reserves the right to 
enforce security measures on personal devices when used to 
access district tools and remove devices found to be in violation 
of the AUP. 
ENERGY MANAGEMENT 
BPS strives to reduce our environmental footprint by pursuing 
energy conservation efforts and practices. The district reserves 
the right to adjust power-saving settings on electronics to reduce 
the energy consumption. 
TECHNOLOGY PURCHASING & DONATIONS 
Technology hardware and software must be purchased or 
donated through OIIT unless prior approval has been received by 
OIIT and the Business Office. All technology purchases and 
donations must abide by City procurement policies and are 
subject to approval by OIIT. Technology pricing can include 
additional expenses required to ensure proper maintenance and 
security, including but not limited to warranties, 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 13 of 13 
 
hardware/software upgrades, virus protection, and 
security/inventory software. Schools or departments applying for 
technology grants, funding, or donations must budget for any 
additional expenses associated with the requested technology 
and can be held responsible for any additional expenses incurred. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Director of Technology 
Department: 
Office of Instructional and Information 
Technology 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9199 
Fax: 
617-635-9176 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
FIN-21 
Version 01 
 
CREATING A BPS-RECOGNIZED INDEPENDENT 501C3 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The Boston Public Schools encourages schools to seek and 
receive external resources to supplement their instructional and 
programmatic strategies. To this end, the Boston Public Schools 
has partnered with the Boston Educational Development Fund 
(BEDF) to serve as a 501c3 fiscal agent to receive financial 
donations as charitable contributions, eligible for tax deductions 
by the donor. Independently, as a fiscal partner to schools, BEDF 
manages funds, creates financial reports, and offers technical 
assistance to schools in their pursuits of private funds. BPS 
schools are entitled to utilize BEDF as a fiscal agent in pursuit of 
private funding.  
In the case that a school wishes to pursue establishing and 
managing an independent 501c3, formal approval is required.  
SCHOOLS WITH EXISTING INDEPENDENT 501C3S 
Schools with existing 501c3s, registered with the proper federal 
and state authorizing agencies, must complete the BPS 
Independent 501c3 Form to update BPS on current details 
including board structure, status, and operating revenue. 
Independent 501c3s with strong governance boards and rationale 
will receive recognition from BPS.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-21 
Page 2 of 3 
 
SCHOOLS SEEKING TO ESTABLISH A BPS-RECOGNIZED 
INDEPENDENT 501C3 
To request to establish a 501c3, all schools must have the 
following: 
• A strong rationale for the need for a separate, independent 
501c3. 
• A draft plan for the 501c3 including governance board. 
• A track record of managing private investments 
appropriately and on-time reporting OR someone on the 
governing board with this experience. 
• An estimate of anticipated annual revenue and revenue 
sources. 
For a school to establish a 501c3, the following outlined steps 
must be completed, and approval given by the superintendent:  
• All schools must complete a BPS Independent 501c3 . 
• Submitted requests will be reviewed by the chief financial 
officer and superintendent and approved if a strong 
application is submitted.  
COMPLIANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY 
BPS reserves the right to alert foundations/nonprofit partners to 
the existence of 501c3 that are considered to be out of 
compliance or that have been created without proper approval 
from the Superintendent’s Office. 
BPS believes in the ability to provide timely, accurate, and 
thorough reports to our philanthropic partners and takes 
seriously the significant commitment of time and expertise that 
this places on a school community to run an independent 501c3.  
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-21 
Page 3 of 3 
 
We encourage the use of our established partner, BEDF, to 
responsibly manage funds. BPS has put these requirements in 
place to ensure proper management of all funds and proper 
reporting, to support schools in philanthropic pursuits, and to 
provide a low-cost 501c3 to house private funding.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Finance 
Department: 
Finance 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building,  
2300 Washington St., Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-7962 
Email: (preferred) finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
  
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER:  
FIN-03 
Version 01 
 
EXPENDITURE REIMBURSEMENT 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version.  
 
The purpose of this memorandum is to clarify those 
circumstances under which reimbursement is appropriate and 
those that are not. 
The reimbursement process is intended to accommodate those 
limited instances where the traditional purchasing system 
cannot be utilized. It is not intended to replace, substitute for, 
supplant, or otherwise institute an alternative purchasing system. 
 
Expenditures Allowable for Reimbursement 
The reimbursement process is intended to allow for the 
immediate purchase of incidental or emergency goods and 
services that could not be contemplated in the normal course of 
business.  This process can be used when the aggregate 
purchase value of goods or services is minimal.  Make sure the 
proper accounting codes are used and align with the expense. 
Examples of these goods or services include reimbursement for 
an emergency, unanticipated supply, or repair needs minimal in 
cost. 
The reimbursement process is intended to allow individuals to be 
reimbursed for personal expenditures incurred in support of 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-03 
Page 2 of 7 
 
authorized Boston Public Schools activities.  This also applies to 
travel expenses as defined and consistent with the Boston Public 
Schools travel policy (refer to Superintendent’s Circular FIN-01 
Travel Policy - Procedures for Approval and Reimbursement). 
 
Expenditures Not Eligible for Reimbursement 
Expenditures not eligible for reimbursement include those for 
the purchase of goods and services that are not consistent with 
the guidelines referenced above.  A detailed description of 
guidelines to be used for purchasing can be found in 
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 – Purchasing Guidelines. 
Certain expenditures, such as purchasing gifts for fellow 
employees, constitute an inappropriate expenditure of resources 
and are not eligible for reimbursement. 
 
Purchase Of Food 
Food for staff events cannot be reimbursed from fund 100.  Fund 
100 can only be used for students, parents and community 
events using the food account code 53204, be sure funds are 
available prior to submitting for reimbursement.  If you are using 
fund 200, the rules of the grant must allow for food purchases, 
prior to purchase always check with your grant liaison. 
The practice of purchasing food products from supermarkets for 
parents, school councils, or other meetings is an acceptable (and 
more cost-effective) mechanism than procuring catered services.  
These expenditures will be reimbursed, but only upon the 
presentation of itemized invoices and cash register receipts. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-03 
Page 3 of 7 
 
Reimbursements will be made only for those items that can be 
appropriately documented. 
 
Gift Cards/Certificates: A Specific Issue 
The purchase of gift cards/certificates is not permitted.  The use 
of gift cards/certificates does not allow for appropriate controls 
that document the nature and value of the items that are 
ultimately purchased.  Nor does this practice allow for the proper 
reporting of expenditures.  It is a practice that is highly 
susceptible to abuse. 
 
Documentation Required for Reimbursement: 
In order to secure prompt reimbursement, all requests must be 
submitted to the Business Office within fifteen (15) business days 
of purchase.  Allowable expenditures for reimbursement must be 
fully supported by appropriate documentation/receipts.  Follow 
the procedures below (Emails Accepted): 
1. 
Submit a completed “City of Boston Special Draft/Non 
Order Form” - it MUST be filled out completely with: 
● School/Department 
● Date 
● Full name of person being reimbursed 
● Full address of person being reimbursed 
● Vendor # 
● Funding source 
● Full “detailed” description     


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-03 
Page 4 of 7 
 
● Total amount requested 
● Must be signed by the employee’s immediate 
supervisor 
2. 
Submit the “Certification Form” attesting “under 
penalty of perjury, that amounts stated are correct and 
were incurred in the service of the City of Boston 
3. 
Itemized (not summary) of cash register receipts  
4. 
Itemized invoice produced by the vendor 
5. 
Copies of the front and back of cancelled personal 
checks, or Credit card statement that details the item(s) 
purchased by an individual.  The name of the person being 
reimbursed should be on the check and credit card 
statement – for Proof of Purchase  
 
BPS does NOT reimburse taxes for expenditures unless the 
Student Activity Account is being used for the purchase - BPS 
will reimburse taxes and tips on FOOD ONLY. 
 
REMINDER:  You must be registered on the City of Boston 
Vendor/Supplier Portal file in order to be reimbursed.  Go to 
www.boston.gov/procurement   click on "Go to Supplier Portal" 
and follow the instructions.  Wait until you are an approved 
vendor and have acquired your vendor number before 
submitting for reimbursement. 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-03 
Page 5 of 7 
 
If Submitting by Paper: 
• ONLY Submit Single-Sided reimbursements packet – Not 
Double Sided.  Also, no smaller than 12 Font and only on 8x11 
white paper. 
• DO NOT highlight or put scotch tape on receipts because it 
fades the receipts – use staples, only legible receipts will be 
reimbursed – Must submit copies on 8x11 paper of all cash 
register receipts. 
 
 
IMPORTANT REMINDER 
The Fiscal School Year ends on June 30 each year and July 1 
starts the new Fiscal School Year - You cannot use current school 
year funds to pay for prior school year expenses. 
 
Reimbursements that are not submitted within the School Fiscal 
Year will be in jeopardy of non-payment. 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-03 
Page 6 of 7 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Unit Leader of Business Services/Accounts 
Payable 
Department: 
Business Services 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA  02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9469 
E-mail: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
Business Services Guide is available here.


Page 7:
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
FIN-01 
Version 01 
 
 
TRAVEL POLICY – PROCEDURES FOR APPROVAL AND 
REIMBURSEMENT 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Most Boston Public School business is conducted locally, on-line 
or by telephone.  Under some special and limited circumstances, 
overnight or out-of-state travel may be required.  These 
circumstances usually arise if the Boston Public Schools is 
obliged to send staff out-of-state if a strong case can be made 
that such travel would substantially benefit the district. 
In all cases, a request for subsidized travel requires justification, 
prior notification, and prior approval.  BPS is not obligated to 
reimburse any employee for travel costs that were not approved 
according to this policy. 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
TRAVEL APPROVAL 
1. Applicants must secure approval using the online form; sign 
in here. Directions for this process are in the BPS Travel 
Request documentation document. It is the sole obligation 
of the traveler to determine that sufficient funds are 
available for reimbursement.   


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-01 
Page 2 of 8 
 
2. No travel should occur until the traveler receives a fully 
APPROVED travel request.  Any travel request that is 
received AFTER the travel has occurred will NOT be 
reimbursed.   
3. All overnight and out of state travel requires prior approval 
and must be submitted at least 20 days prior to departure 
date.  When you apply, the online form will go through the 
following approvers for signatures: school leader, school 
superintendent/division chief, financial analyst, chief 
financial officer, and operations manager/superintendent.  
The traveler will need to follow their travel approval 
application online in case there is a question that an 
approver may have or a denial which they will note on the 
application.  When the application is approved, you are then 
eligible to travel and receive any reimbursements owed to 
you. 
4. Please note that only these two accounts must be used:  
• 52802 for planes, trains, busses, taxis, Ubers/Lyfts etc. – 
the cost associated with getting there. 
• 52804 for conference fees, hotel, food etc. – the cost 
associated with being there. 
You should also use these two accounts when doing 
requisitions for travel. 
5. Supporting documentation describing the conference and 
the purpose of your attendance must be attached to the 
online travel request form with any other pertinent 
information. 
6. All staff planning to attend an overnight or out-of-town 
conference are required upon their return to prepare a 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-01 
Page 3 of 8 
 
report of the presentations/workshops, etc., attended and to 
submit their report to their immediate supervisor, who shall 
determine the format of this report. 
7. If travel is being paid for by the conference host, the BPS 
Employee Disclosure Form (3 pages) must be attached to 
your “Travel Approval Form” application. 
REIMBURSEMENT OF TRAVEL EXPENSES 
To secure prompt reimbursement for travel, reimbursement 
requests must be submitted to the Business Office within fifteen 
(15) business days after the travel has occurred.  The traveler must 
submit the following forms, documentation/receipts to Accounts 
Payable, Office of the Business Manager (emails accepted): 
1. A completed City of Boston Special Draft/Non Order Form, 
filled out completely with: 
• School/department 
• Date 
• Full name of person being reimbursed 
• Full address of person being reimbursed 
• Vendor # (see NOTE below) 
• Funding source 
• Full detailed description: name of conference, dates, and 
place/state where held 
• Amount being reimbursed 
• Signed by the employee’s immediate supervisor. 
2. A copy of City of Boston and County of Suffolk Travel Expense 
Voucher (attached).  This form must be filled out completely 
with each daily expense, then signed on the lower right by 
the person taking the trip and on the lower left by the 
department head. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-01 
Page 4 of 8 
 
3. The “Certification Form” attesting, under the pains and 
penalties of perjury, that the requested reimbursement was 
incurred as reasonable expenses in the service of the City of 
Boston. 
4. A copy of the approved Request for Travel Approval form 
MUST be attached. 
IMPORTANT NOTES: 
BPS does not reimburse taxes for expenditures.  BPS will 
reimburse taxes and tips on FOOD ONLY. 
Reimbursements cannot exceed the amount authorized by the 
Superintendent.  Only in extreme conditions can this original 
amount be increased via an amended travel form which must be 
submitted to the Finance Office prior to travel.   
If travel substitution occurs, an amended form approved by the 
Superintendent is required before travel.  A copy of the “Travel 
Approval” must be submitted with each request for 
reimbursement. 
REMINDER:  You must be registered on the City of Boston 
Vendor/Supplier Portal file to be reimbursed.  Go to 
www.boston.gov/procurement, click on "Go to Supplier Portal," 
and follow the instructions.  Wait until you are an approved 
vendor and have acquired your vendor number before 
submitting for reimbursement. 
If submitting by paper: 
• ONLY submit single-sided reimbursements packet – not 
double-sided.   
• 12-point font or larger on 8.5 x 11 white paper. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-01 
Page 5 of 8 
 
• DO NOT highlight or put scotch tape on receipts because 
it fades the receipts; use staples. Only legible receipts will 
be reimbursed. Must submit copies of all cash register 
receipts on 8.5 x 11 paper. 
ALLOWABLE EXPENSES 
1. Economy class commercial carrier charges (airlines, trains, 
buses) are to be used at all times.   The maximum 
reimbursement will be limited to the lowest commercial 
carrier fare to the destination.  The maximum limitation 
does not apply for in-state travel. 
2. Hotel charges are limited to $200.00 per night.  Exceptions 
to this limit will only be approved if: 
a) basic accommodations are unavailable, or 
b) basic accommodations are too distant from the event, 
or 
c) the event is being held at a specific hotel. 
3. The purchase of meals will be reimbursed when supported 
by original receipts, not to exceed $50.00 per day.  A 
maximum of $25.00 per day will be allowed without 
receipts.  Each person traveling must pay for their own 
meals (NOT other individuals or group meals) unless 
otherwise noted on the Travel Approval Request; the name 
of each individual must be listed on the Travel Approval 
Request prior to travel. 
a) Gratuities cannot exceed 20%. 
b) Original receipts must include an itemized breakdown 
of what was ordered.  If an itemized breakdown is not 
provided, the $25.00 per-diem allowance will be 
reimbursed. 
c) Reimbursement for room service also requires the 
submission of an itemized breakdown. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-01 
Page 6 of 8 
 
4. Conference registration fees must be supported by original 
documentation.     
LOCAL TRANSPORTATION CHARGES 
1. Car rentals/gas and airport parking must be listed on the 
“Travel Approval” if reimbursement is to be requested.   
2. Charges claimed for taxis/Lyfts/Ubers must be supported by 
original receipts. 
3. Travel by automobile is eligible for reimbursement at the 
current IRS allowable rate per mile (see Superintendent’s 
Circular FIN-02 – Mileage) 
4. Tolls and parking charges must be supported by original 
receipts. 
MISCELLANEOUS TRAVEL ISSUES 
1. Travel by City Contractors/Vendors.  Some contracts and/or 
service agreements may require the vendor to travel on 
behalf of the Boston Public Schools.  The City of Boston 
Travel Policy must be incorporated by reference into the 
contract/agreements prior to execution.  
2. Conflicting Obligations.  It is generally not permissible, 
without the prior review and approval of the Office of Legal 
Advisor, to engage in travel sponsored by a third party. 
IMPORTANT REMINDER 
The Fiscal School Year ends on June 30 each year and July 1 starts 
the new Fiscal School Year. You cannot use current school year 
funds to pay for prior school year expenses. 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-01 
Page 7 of 8 
 
Reimbursements that are not submitted within the School Fiscal 
Year will be in jeopardy of non-payment. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Principal Account Clerk Accounts Payable 
Business Services 
Department: 
Operations 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9472 
Email: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-01 
Page 8 of 8 
 
CITY OF BOSTON AND COUNTY OF SUFFOLK 
TRAVEL EXPENSE VOUCHER 
THIS FORM IS SUBMITTED WITH REIMBURSEMENT RECEIPTS 
TO THE AUDITING DEPARTMENT (Business Office). 
ORIGINAL TO BE FILED IN AUDITOR'S OFFICE 
 
 
Month of: 
      
 
 
Name of Official or Employee:  
Department and Unit: Boston Public Schools 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Day 
Description 
PRIVATE 
AUTOMOBILE 
Rail-
Road 
Fares 
Bus Taxi and 
other fares 
 
Meals 
 
HOTEL 
Tele-
phone 
& Tele-
graph 
All Other 
TOTAL 
 
 
Miles 
Amount 
 
 
Break
-fast 
Lunch 
Dinner 
 
 
Item 
Amount 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOTALS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By signing this voucher you certify that each item of expenditure was incurred and was necessary in the service of the City or County 
and complies with the regulations on the back of this voucher. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I hereby certify that I have personally examined this statement, that I approve of each item of 
expense hereon, that each item conforms to the regulations printed on the back, the amounts 
charged are reasonable and the expenditures necessary in the service of the City or County. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature 
 
 
 
Signature 
 
 
 
Department Head 
 
 
 
 
Employee 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FIN-19 
Version 01 
 
 
 
BPS MAILROOM AND COPY CENTER GUIDELINES 
BPS POSTAGE & PRINTING POLICY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
OVERVIEW 
We are responsible for directing the operational performance of 
the mailroom and Copy Center to ensure an efficient, cost-
effective, and secure operation. Responsibilities include 
managing the processing of high-volume daily mail, loading and 
delivery of heavy shipments, scanning, copying, printing, and 
sending and receiving all sorts of documents. 
MAILROOM OPERATIONS 
Adhering to the following guidelines will facilitate a smoother 
operation of the mailroom at the Bolling Building: 
• Only school-related items will be processed through the 
mailroom for postage.  
o These items need to be properly sealed and bundled. 
o Items need to have a school return address. We need 
to know who is sending each mailing to keep track and 
to avoid missing undeliverable mail.  
• Each school/department will be charged for postage used. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-19 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
o Each school / department should have a budget line 
allocated for mailing purposes. 
• Personal mail will not be processed through the mailroom 
for postage (e.g., mortgage, utility, credit card payments, 
birthday cards, mail returns, etc.). 
o The mailroom is not responsible for receiving or storing 
personal deliveries (e.g., personal packages from 
Amazon, Walmart, Target, etc.). 
• All interoffice mail should be addressed as follows: 
o Name of person, school, and/or department where the 
mail should be delivered 
o Cluster number 
o Return address (who is sending the mail?) 
• Please do not put sticky notes on the outside of every 
envelope (adhesive glue could damage the postage 
machine). One per bundle is fine. 
• Advance notice is required for mailings of over 2000 pieces 
of mail. Please contact Mailroom & Copy Center by phone 
617-635-9075 or email, finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org. 
• Schools and departments will be charged for each mailing 
over 100 pieces of mail. 
• UPS, FEDEX, DHL: BPS does not have a business account 
with any shipping carriers.  
o All mail and packages intended to be shipped through 
any of these carriers should be prepaid by the sender. 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-19 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
COURIER SERVICES 
Also known as cluster mail, starting at the Bolling Building, our 
courier delivers and picks up interoffice mail 2 times a week to 
our cluster offices located throughout the district. Each school is 
a part of a cluster (previously known as zones, networks, TLTs) 
Adhering to the following guidelines will facilitate a smoother 
operation of the courier services: 
• The courier is an EXTERNAL vendor under contract, not BPS 
operated. 
• All mail should be clearly marked, including the sender and 
receiver. 
o Each school belongs to a cluster; if unsure, please 
contact the mailroom for the latest information. 
• The courier runs on Tuesday and Thursday of each week. 
• The current contract requires the courier to pick up no more 
than 3 bins of mail per cluster. 
o If on a certain day a cluster office has more than 3 bins 
of outgoing mail, the courier could pick up the excess 
on the next run. 
• The courier DOES NOT GO TO EACH SCHOOL. 
o Special runs can be requested at an additional charge 
paid to the vendor. 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-19 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
COPY CENTER OPERATIONS 
The BPS Copy Center provides various copy and printing 
functions. With our copying and finishing, we can have your 
manuals, student handbooks, presentations, letters to students, 
and much more completed in-house, saving BPS and the city 
money. 
● Our printing services offer: 
○ Mass production copying and printing. 
■ Black & White  
■ Color  
○ Posters up to 24x36 inches 
○ Three-hole punch  
○ Staple finishing 
● Printing services NOT offered by the BPS Copy Center: 
○ Envelopes 
○ Books 
○ Lamination 
○ Postcards 
○ Banners, etc. 
Adhering to the following guidelines will facilitate a smoother 
operation of our in-house printing services: 
● Printing services work on a first come-first served basis. 
● Advanced notice is required for all jobs. 
○ Please consider that there is a high volume of requests 
during the beginning and end of the school year, as 
well as during the summer as schools prepare for the 
new school year. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-19 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
CHARGES FOR PRINTING SERVICES 
Each job will be charged to the schools at lower than market 
cost. Please contact the Copy Center for the latest quote. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Mailroom & Copy Center 
Department: 
Business Services  
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9075 
E-mail: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
● Essential Training Guide is available here. 
● Business Services Guide is available here. 


Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FIN-10 
Version 01 
 
GRANTS GUIDELINES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS GRANTS 
All grants going to the Boston Public Schools — to the district as 
a whole, individual schools, or central offices — must adhere to 
federal, state, city, and district policy. This circular contains the 
grant management standards and procedures the district uses to 
ensure all funds are lawfully expended. 
Based on the funding source, grants will be housed in either the 
Office of Grants and External Funding or the Boston Educational 
Development Foundation (BEDF). All federal and state grants, as 
well as some private grants, are housed in the Office of Grants 
and External Funding and must adhere to the following 
information. Private grants that are housed in the Boston 
Educational Development Foundation (BEDF) 501c3 account 
must adhere to the rules and regulations of BEDF. Information on 
BEDF can be found in Superintendent’s Circular FIN-09.  
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
All grants must adhere to federal, state, city, and Boston Public 
Schools requirements for purchasing, accounting, auditing, civil 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 2 of 14 
 
rights, access, and confidentiality, as well as established 
guidelines set forth by the funder. Regulations for state and 
federal grants are published in the Grants Management 
Procedural Manual published by the Bureau of Grants 
Management of the Massachusetts Department of Education. All 
federal grants must comply with EDGAR 2 C.F.R.§ 200. All policies 
and procedures, as well as internal controls and grant 
management standards used by the BPS to ensure that all funds 
are lawfully expended are outlined in the Fiscal Policies and 
Procedures Manual. 
Any individual who works under a grant, expends grant funds, or 
oversees a department that utilizes grant funds is responsible for 
lawfully expending grant funds. 
GRANT GUIDELINES FOR GRANTS IN THE OFFICE OF GRANTS 
AND EXTERNAL FUNDING 
The following documents are required when seeking grant 
funding: 
• Intent to Apply Form 
• School Committee Approval Form 
• Boston Fiscal Policies and Procedures 
• Grants Subrecipient and Responsibilities  
Program managers and grant applicants are responsible for 
implementing the following rules for seeking and managing 
grants: 
1. Most federal and state grants follow the ‘supplement and 
not supplant’ rule. This means grant money must not be 
used to replace positions previously funded with local 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 3 of 14 
 
money and should not be used to fund non-salary items 
that are the responsibility of the local school district. For 
example, grant funds may not be used to fund classroom 
teachers or administrative personnel, as these positions are 
considered core. A clear indication of supplanting is shifting 
a position from GSP to a grant. 
2. Grant-funded programs should be self-sufficient. Awarded 
funds must cover all expenses of the program, including 
wages, benefits, supplies, transportation, utilities, custodial 
requirements, and fees. Please consult the Office of Grants 
and External Funding and the Budget Office for approval of 
any exceptions. If technology is involved, applicants should 
consult with the Office of Information and Instructional 
Technology (OIIT) to ensure that they are in support of the 
proposal. 
3. All BPS policies, procedures, rules, and regulations apply to 
grant- funded programs. Regular personnel, budget, and 
business procedures apply to grant funded programs in the 
same way they apply to locally funded programs. Please 
reference appropriate budget, business, and human capital 
memoranda for rules and procedures. 
4. No agreement to apply for or be a subrecipient of a grant is 
to be entered into with an outside organization or entity on 
behalf of the district without the approval of the Grants and 
External Funds Office. 
PRE-AWARD 
All BPS staff, parents, and partners are encouraged to seek and 
apply for grant opportunities from a variety of sources. Grant 
development should be a team process within the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 4 of 14 
 
department/school to enable those individuals who will 
ultimately be responsible for implementing the grant to be 
involved. Heads of school, principals, and other administrative 
heads must be aware and pre-approve grant proposals for 
programs that will take place under their supervision. 
INTENT TO APPLY 
All BPS entities planning to pursue a grant opportunity must 
submit an online Intent to Apply form for all federal and state 
grants, as well as private grants over $10,000. The Intent to Apply 
form should be submitted as soon as the funding opportunity 
and applicant have been identified, but no less than 3 weeks 
before the grant due date. This will ensure that potential grant 
applications are consistent with BPS goals and policies and are 
not in conflict with BPS solicitations for funds to the same 
agencies and donors. 
Your intent to apply will be reviewed on a weekly basis. Upon 
approval, you will receive a completed Grant Cover Page with 
your submitted information and details on next steps. 
Superintendent Signature 
The Office of Grants and External Funding will facilitate obtaining 
the superintendent’s signature on your behalf. Please submit the 
Intent to Apply form, and the Office of Grants and External 
Funding will contact you within ten (10) days with next steps. All 
documents requiring signature (including electronic signature) 
must be submitted at least one week (7 days) before they are 
due. All proposals must be submitted through the Intent to Apply 
form and obtain approval to move forward from the Grants 
Review Team before signatures will be obtained. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 5 of 14 
 
Letter of Support 
The Office of Grants and External Funding will facilitate and 
obtain all signatures on letters of support from the 
superintendent and mayor (for federal grants). Once the Intent to 
Apply has been reviewed and approved by the Grants Review 
Team, please draft a letter of support for signature. All letters 
requiring signature must be submitted at least one week (7 days) 
before they are due. 
If you are requesting a letter of support from BPS not tied to a 
BPS grant application, please complete the online Letter of 
Support Request Form. The Office of Grants and External 
Funding will follow up with next steps. 
BUDGET CREATION 
The Office of Grants and External Funding can assist with 
developing and reviewing your application’s budget. Once you 
complete the online Intent to Apply Form, the Office of Federal 
and Grants will contact you. Please reply to this communication 
to schedule time to create and review your budget. All budgets 
must adhere to BPS, state, and federal regulations and budgets 
that do not adhere will need to be amended before BPS will 
approve or allow spending. 
SUPERINTENDENT SIGNATURE 
All grant applications that will be submitted to external funders 
(private, state, and federal) must have internal BPS approval prior 
to submission. The Office of Grants and External Funding will 
facilitate this process. 
After completing the Intent to Apply form, the Office of Grants 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 6 of 14 
 
and External Funding will contact you with next steps. All 
documents requiring signature (including electronic signature) 
must be submitted at least one week (7 days) before they are 
due. The superintendent is the only authorized representative 
who can sign grant proposals on behalf of BPS. 
BPS can submit the grant to the funder on the requester’s behalf. 
In some cases, grants can also be submitted directly from the 
program manager, if so preferred, but only after all prior steps are 
completed. 
ONCE GRANT HAS BEEN AWARDED 
School Committee Approval 
All grants being managed through the Office of Grants and 
External Funding must be approved by the School Committee 
before they can be officially accepted by BPS. Similarly, the 
School Committee’s approval is required before the Office of 
Grants and External Funding can gain access to the grant funds 
in conjunction with City Hall. Therefore, as soon as a grant 
application has been submitted, the grant may be submitted for 
School Committee approval. 
To obtain School Committee approval, three steps must be 
completed: 
1. A packet of School Committee materials is submitted to the 
Office of Federal and State Grants. This packet includes a 
complete School Committee Acceptance Form, the full 
grant budget, the grant narrative, the signed cover page (if 
available), MOA/MOU (if available), and award letter (if 
available). This must be submitted no later than 14 days prior 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 7 of 14 
 
to any School Committee meeting. 
2. A meeting is held between the program manager and the 
Office of Grants and External Funding. 
3. The program manager attends the School Committee 
meeting, answering any questions that may arise 
surrounding the grant. 
Once the grant has been approved by the School Committee, 
official confirmation of the School Committee acceptance will be 
sent out to the requester via email approximately 2 days after the 
School Committee vote. 
Please contact Coordinator, Office of Grants and External 
Funding at finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org,  with any 
questions about or requests for School Committee approval. 
Grant Set-up 
Once a ‘notice of payment’ (official award letter from grantor), 
funding wire or MOA/executed contract has been received by the 
Office of Grants and External Funding and the grant has received 
School Committee approval, the grant set-up process will begin. 
During the set-up process, the Office of Grants and External 
Funding will map the submitted budget to the BAIS 
Financials/PeopleSoft system. The grant will be set up according 
to the budget that was approved by the funder. Once the budget 
is set up within BPS, it is set up in the City of Boston’s system. The 
Office of Grants and External Funding will alert program 
managers once this occurs and spending may then begin. This 
process takes approximately eight days from the date the 
payment notice is received. For questions on grant set up, please 
contact the coordinator of Federal and State Grants, Carlos 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 8 of 14 
 
Coordinator, Office of Grants and External Funding (finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org). 
GRANT SPENDING 
Grant Monitoring and Spending 
It is the responsibility of the program manager to monitor the 
spending of the grant. This includes: assuring that the grant 
funds are being used for allowable expenses; spending according 
to the grant timeline; working closely with the Business Office to 
process any contracts and/or procurement needs; entering all 
requisitions; monitoring purchase orders; entering receipt for 
goods/services; and submitting invoices to Accounts Payable for 
all work orders related to their budgeted grant funds. It is the 
responsibility of the program manager’s supervisor to assure 
these responsibilities are fully completed according to 
requirements and to offer assistance, when necessary. 
Throughout the life of a grant, the budget may need to be 
adjusted. This is done through budget transfers in the BAIS 
Financials system. Changes may be made among grant lines but 
not into or out of a grant to make changes to the grand total. 
Changes to the initial grant intent are NOT allowable. 
Before any changes are made to the approved grant budget, 
approval should be obtained from the funder. An amendment 
may be required. If so, the Office of Grants and External Funding 
will help with completing and filing the amendment. Please 
contact Carlos Martinez, Coordinator of Federal and State Grants, 
regarding amendments. 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 9 of 14 
 
Subrecipient Monitoring and Spending 
In accordance with the Uniform Grant Guidance, all sub awards 
— where BPS is serving as the pass-through entity — must be 
clearly identified and managed according to the standards set 
forth by Federal Regulations,  2 CFR 200.331. The program 
manager is responsible for communicating federal regulations 
and assuring that subrecipients adhere to sub-award regulations. 
Please contact the Office of Grants and External Funding for 
more information about subrecipient monitoring. 
Grant Spending Reports 
Program managers will receive quarterly spend-down reports 
from the Office of Grants and External Funding. The report is 
designed to provide a high-level overview of spending, as well as 
spending details. It is the responsibility of program managers to 
look through the report, identify any errors in spending, and 
report back any programmatic changes that may have affected 
the budget timeline. 
Amendments 
An amendment is necessary when there is a modification to the 
scope or finances of a previously approved grant application. 
When the scope of a project changes significantly or the 
expenditure of a budgeted category exceeds a variance of 10% or 
$10,000, whichever is greater, an amendment is needed. 
Amendments should be submitted at least 30 days prior to the 
desired change. Most federal and state grants require a final 
amendment to be filed no later than 30 days prior to the end of 
the grant. The Office of Grants and External Funding will submit 
any amendments necessary but will need justification from the 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 10 of 14 
 
Program Manager on why the changes occurred. 
GRANT CLEAN UP AND CLOSE OUT 
Grant Clean-up 
In the final weeks of the grant, clean-up must occur for most 
grants. To close out a grant and file a final amendment, there 
may not be any remaining requisitions, and all purchase orders 
must be fully received. It is the responsibility of the program 
manager to assure that the grant is clean for close and final 
reports. 
Prior to the grant end date, all requisitions must either be 
canceled or converted to purchase orders. All purchase orders 
must be fully received in BAIS financials by the grant end date. If 
a purchase order will not be paid in full, the remainder must be 
canceled prior the grant end date. It is the responsibility of the 
program manager to monitor clean up, work with the Business 
Office to convert requisitions, cancel POs, and enter receipts for 
goods and services. 
Stipend requests (PS08s) must be submitted and approved 
before stipend work can be performed. Final stipend paperwork 
(PS09s) must be submitted within two weeks of the stipend 
period ending, hence no later than two weeks of the grant end 
date. Failure to purchase items or submit stipend requests by the 
above deadlines may result in forfeiting of funds. 
Grant Outcomes Reporting 
At the conclusion of each grant, program managers must report 
the outcomes of their SMART goals presented to the School 
Committee. The Office of Grants and External Funding will reach 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 11 of 14 
 
out to program managers for this information. This report will be 
shared with the School Committee and key stakeholders. 
Grant Close 
Grant funds must be spent prior to the grant end date. Funds not 
utilized by this end date will be forfeited. For grant compliance 
purposes, only funds that are encumbered — as defined by being 
on a purchase order and fully received in BAIS financials — or 
expended by the grant end date can be claimed under the grant. 
The program manager is responsible for assuring that this occurs 
by the grant end date. 
FISCAL REPORTING 
All fiscal reporting will be completed by, or must be reviewed by, 
the Office of Grants and External Funding/Auditing Department. 
No fiscal report may be submitted to the funder without review 
by the Office of Grants and External Funding/Auditing 
Department. 
FINAL REPORTS 
Final financial reports will be completed by the Auditing 
Department. Final reports are due to the funder 60 days after the 
grant closes. To assure that a final report is filed on time, all 
requisitions and open purchase orders should be cleaned up as 
soon as possible after the grant end date. Once the final report 
has been completed and submitted, a copy will be sent to the 
program manager for record-keeping purposes. 
MULTI-YEAR GRANTS 
Multi-year or continuing federal and state grant accounts must 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 12 of 14 
 
be established at the start of each fiscal year. Accounts are not 
automatically opened or carried forward from year to year. 
Therefore, responsible administrative heads, department 
managers, and relevant program managers should share, on an 
annual basis, all award notification from their respective funders 
with the Office of Grants and External Funding 
PROGRAMMATIC REPORTING 
Programmatic grant reports are the responsibility of the program 
manager who is supervising the grant implementation. Please 
share all such completed reports with the Office of Grants and 
External Funding. Grant-related financial reports and requests for 
revenue are managed by the BPS Business Office. However, 
please share any relevant details for these well in advance, with 
Director of State & Federal Grants (finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org) and/or Coordinator, Office of 
Grants and External Funding (finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org), so they can be submitted to the 
funder by the intended deadline. 
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 13 of 14 
 
GRANTS MANAGEMENT RESOURCES 
Grants Website 
The Office of Grants and External Funding provides information 
about grants at BPS, resources for finding grant opportunities, 
contact information, process and policy information, the 
quarterly newsletters, and constant updates that may impact 
grants. 
Internal Grants Management Library 
This internal resource provides detailed information about 
managing a grant in BPS. This searchable and constantly 
updated document includes common grant application answers, 
key application documents, how-to guides on running common 
reports, and step-by-step instructions on how to manage a 
budget, contact information, and information on how to perform 
most grant activities in BPS. 
CONTACT INFORMATION FOR OFFICE OF GRANTS AND 
EXTERNAL FUNDING 
Director of State & Federal Grants  
617-635-9577 
Email: finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Senior Grants Manager 
617-635-8582 
Email: finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 14 of 14 
 
 
Coordinator, Office of Grants and External Funding 617-635-9084 
Email: finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Accounting Coordinator 
617-635-9466 
Email: TBD 
 
External Funding Analyst - Please see Superintendent’s Circular 
FIN-04, Student Activity Accounts. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of State & Federal Grants 
Department: 
Director of Grants and External Funding, Finance 
Mailing 
Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington St., 
Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9577 
Email: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FIN-12 
Version 01 
 
 
TRUST FUNDS FOR SCHOOLS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
This memorandum provides procedures for making awards from 
centrally administered trusts that benefit schools. Heads of 
schools and principals are responsible for knowing the eligibility 
of their schools for trust funds, for ensuring that trust fund 
purchases are appropriately selected, and for following 
procedures for the awards. Please submit your requests to the 
Finance Office as soon as possible and no later than May 31, 2024. 
Late requests will not be processed. 
1. 
ELIGIBILITY FOR AWARDS 
See Attachment 1 for awards by school. 
See Attachment 2 for a description of the awards listed in 
alphabetical order. 
2. 
PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTING FUNDS 
Submit a detailed list of items including the item name, publisher 
and/or vendor, and the cost, together with a cover memorandum 
giving the name of the trust and the total requested. Separate 
letterhead must be used for each award request. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-12 
Page 2 of 14 
 
 
3. 
PROCEDURES FOR RECEIVING FUNDS 
Checks will be sent directly to the recipient at the address 
provided by the school. Principals/heads of schools should retain 
records of all requests, receipt of checks, and documentation of 
purchases for five years. Documentation of purchases should be 
available on request. 
 
ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS  
AWARD 
ALL ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS 
Peter F. Degrand Award 
Charlestown Schools 
Devens Infant School 
Dorchester Schools 
Bowdoin 
Dorchester Schools  
Stoughton School 
Dorchester/South Boston Schools Gibson School Fund 
Condon Elementary School 
Norcross School Library 
Blackstone Elementary School 
Webb Franklin 
Eliot k-8 School 
Abigail Smith  
Harvard-Kent Elementary 
Devens Infant School 
Joseph J. Hurley K-8 School 
Webb Franklin 
Quincy Elementary School 
Abigail Smith  
 
Martin Milmore Award 
Warren-Prescott K-8 School 
Devens Infant School 
Winthrop Elementary School 
Henry B. Hall Award 
 
MIDDLE SCHOOLS 
AWARD 
Timilty Middle School (closed) 
Sherwin School Graduates 
Washington Irving Middle School 
Harrington Trust Fund  
HIGH SCHOOLS 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-12 
Page 3 of 14 
 
 
Dorchester Academy  
Bowdoin Dorchester 
 
Gibson School Fund 
 
Stoughton School 
Boston Community Leadership  
Academy 
Anna & Alice Maguire 
Boston Latin Academy 
Bowdoin Dorchester 
 
Gibson School Fund 
 
Persis P. Drake 
 
Stoughton School 
Roxbury Memorial 
Scholarship  
Brighton High School 
Elvira B. Smith 
Burke High School 
Bowdoin Dorchester 
 
Gibson School Fund 
 
Stoughton School 
English High School  
William Stewart 
Excel High School 
Gibson School Fund  
Horace Mann School 
Susan E. Gavett 
 
Mrs. John A. Lewis 
 
Samuel E. Sawyer 
 
Adams/Osgood Fund 
Madison Park High School 
Costello C. Converse 
 
 
CENTRAL OFFICE 
Superintendent 
Teachers Waterston 
 
TRUST FUNDS FOR SCHOOLS ADMINISTERED CENTRALLY 
Bowdoin Dorchester 
James Bowdoin 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-12 
Page 4 of 14 
 
 
Converse 
Costello C. Converse 
DeGrand 
Peter F. DeGrand 
Devens 
Devens Infant School 
Drake 
Persis P. Drake 
Eastburn 
John Eastburn Fund 
Gibson  
Christopher Gibson 
Hall 
Henry B. Hall 
Harrington  
Francis E.; Alice S. 
Horace Mann 
Susan E. Gavett 
Horace Mann 
Mrs. John A. Lewis 
Horace Mann 
Samuel E. Sawyer 
Horace Mann 
Adams/Osgood Fund 
 
 
Milmore 
Martin Milmore 
 
Maguire 
Alice and Anna Maguire 
Norcross 
Norcross School Library 
Sherwin 
Sherwin School Graduates 
Smith, A. 
Abiel Smith 
Smith, E. 
Elvira Bush Smith 
Stewart  
William Stewart 
Stoughton 
Stoughton School 
Waterston 
Teachers Waterston 
Webb Franklin 
Webb Franklin  
 
 
 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-12 
Page 5 of 14 
 
 
BOWDOIN DORCHESTER bequest of James Bowdoin established 
in 1889. 
Eligibility: Schools located in Dorchester only (Dorchester 
address). 
Criteria: 
To benefit the public schools 
Award:  
$750 total. A check divided to schools who apply. 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office with a detailed 
list of items being purchased. All requests must be 
submitted on school/office letterhead. 
 
CONVERSE FUND in memory of Costello C. Converse, established 
in 1931. 
Eligibility: Madison Park Technical Vocational High School 
Criteria: 
General uses and purposes of the school. 
Award: 
$500 available; check payable to the school  
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office with a detailed 
list of items being purchased. All requests must be 
submitted on school/office letterhead. 
 
PETER F. DEGRAND to purchase books for kindergarten, first, and 
second grades. 
Eligibility: For the purchase of books for students attending 
kindergarten, first and second grades in the City of 
Boston.  
Criteria: 
Excellent attendance 
Award: 
$2,500 available. A check divided to the schools that 
apply. 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office with a detailed 
list of items being purchased. All requests must be 
submitted on school/office letterhead. 
 
DEVENS INFANT SCHOOL K1&2 - 2 grades. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-12 
Page 6 of 14 
 
 
Eligibility: Schools located in Charlestown for kindergarten, 
grades one and two. 
Criteria: 
Excellent attendance for the use and benefit of 
children 
Award: 
$100 available. A check divided to the schools that 
apply. 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office with a detailed 
list of items being purchased. All requests must be 
submitted on school/office letterhead. 
 
DRAKE FUND gift of Persis P. Drake 
Eligibility: Boston Latin Academy 
Criteria: 
To benefit the school 
Award: 
$200 available, payable to the school 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office with a detailed 
list of items being purchased. All requests must be 
submitted on school/office letterhead. 
 
JOHN EASTBURN SCHOOL FUND 
Eligibility: High school seniors who are Boston residents (proof 
of residence required) and are pursuing a teaching 
curriculum at the University of Massachusetts. 
Award: 
$1,000 available 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office. Nominating 
procedure with name, address, date of birth, student 
number, and Social Security number of recipient. All 
requests must be on school/office letterhead.  
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-12 
Page 7 of 14 
 
 
GIBSON SCHOOL FUND a bequest from Christopher Gibson 
established in 1674. 
Eligibility: Schools located in the Dorchester neighborhood, 
which in 1674, included South Boston.  
Criteria: 
For library books and teaching equipment 
Award:  
$9,500 total available: A check payable (in proportion) 
to the schools that apply. 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office with a detailed 
list of items being purchased. All requests must be 
submitted on school/office letterhead. 
 
HENRY B. HALL for books and supplies. 
Eligibility: John Winthrop School 
Criteria: 
Books and supplies 
Award: 
$17,000 available, payable to the school 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office with a detailed 
list of items being purchased. All requests must be 
submitted on school/office letterhead. 
 
FRANCIS E. & ALICE S. HARRINGTON TRUST FUND 
 Eligibility:  Washington Irving Middle School 
Criteria: 
Two top students who obtain the highest combined 
grade average in French or another foreign language 
for two academic years. 
Award:  
$100 available 
Submit:  
Submit a request to the Finance Office. Nominating 
procedure with name, address, date of birth, student 
number, and Social Security number of recipient. All 
requests must be on school/office letterhead.  
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-12 
Page 8 of 14 
 
 
ANNA & ALICE MAGUIRE for the school located at 152 Arlington 
Street. 
Eligibility: Boston High School (now Boston Community 
Leadership Academy) 
Criteria 
Purchase of books for students in attendance 
Award: 
$50 available; payable to school 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office with a detailed 
list of items being purchased. All requests must be 
submitted on school/office letterhead.  
 
HORACE MANN SCHOOL FUNDS 
Susan E. Gavett bequest, received in 1909.  
Award: $450 check payable to school 
Mrs. John A. Lewis legacy, received in 1903.  
Award: $100 check payable to school 
Samuel E. Sawyer, received in 1895.  
Award: $150 check payable to school 
Adams/Osgood Fund, received in 1936.  
Award: $4,000 check payable to school 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office with a detailed 
list of items being purchased. All requests must be 
submitted on school/office letterhead. 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-12 
Page 9 of 14 
 
 
MARTIN MILMORE 
Eligibility: Josiah Quincy and others from the former Brimmer 
School District 
Criteria: 
Equal distribution among eligible schools 
Award: 
$50 total available, payable to the school 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office with a detailed 
list of items being purchased. All requests must be 
submitted on school/office letterhead. 
 
NORCROSS SCHOOL LIBRARY to assist school libraries within the 
former Norcross School District. 
Eligibility: Condon Elementary School 
Criteria: 
To assist the library 
Award: 
$100 available, payable to the school 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office with a detailed 
list of items being purchased. All requests must be 
submitted on school/office letterhead. 
 
ROXBURY MEMORIAL SCHOLARSHIP FUND 
Eligibility: One male and one female in the graduating class at 
Boston Latin Academy. 
Criteria: 
Strongest academic growth 
Award: 
$850 available 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office. Nominating 
procedure with name, address, date of birth, student 
number, and Social Security number of recipient. All 
requests must be on school/office letterhead. 
 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-12 
Page 10 of 14 
 
 
SHERWIN SCHOOL GRADUATES for K-8 schools within the 
former Sherwin School district. 
Eligibility: Timilty Middle School (closed) 
Criteria: 
For the benefit of the school 
Award: 
$100 available, payable to the school 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office with a detailed 
list of items being purchased. All requests must be 
submitted on school/office letterhead. 
 
SMITH, ABIGAIL FUND for books in equal portions for Quincy and 
Eliot Schools. 
Eligibility: Quincy and Eliot Schools 
Criteria: 
Purchase of books 
Award: 
$800 available / $400 per school if both schools apply. 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office with a detailed 
list of items being purchased. All requests must be 
submitted on school/office letterhead. 
 
SMITH, ELVIRA FUND in memory of Elvira B. Smith, established in 
1940. 
Eligibility: Brighton High School 
Criteria: 
Books, and/or other educational materials for the 
history department as directed by the headmaster 
with approval of the head of the History Dept. 
Award: 
$50 available. Check payable to the school 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office with a detailed 
list of items being purchased. All requests must be 
submitted on school/office letterhead. 
 
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-12 
Page 11 of 14 
 
 
STOUGHTON SCHOOL supplements the salaries of temporary 
substitute teachers in high and grammar schools in Dorchester. 
Eligibility: Schools with a Dorchester address 
Criteria: 
Substitute teachers, supplement to regular 
compensation in the form of additional days’ work  
 
Award: 
$300 available 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office. Nominating 
procedure with name, address, date of birth, student 
number, and Social Security number of recipient. All 
requests must be on school/office letterhead. 
 
TEACHERS WATERSTON for lectures to teachers regarding 
natural history or any of its various departments. 
Eligibility: At the discretion of the superintendent 
Criteria: 
Lectures to teachers regarding natural history or any 
of its various departments. 
Award: 
$500 available  
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office. Date and 
lecture information required. 
 
WEBB FRANKLIN 
Eligibility: Blackstone and Hurley Schools 
Criteria: 
Books for students 
Award: 
$275 available/$137.50 per school if both schools apply.  
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office with a detailed 
list of items being purchased. All requests must be 
submitted on school/office letterhead. 
 
 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-12 
Page 12 of 14 
 
 
WILLIAM STEWART 
Eligibility: English High School 
Criteria: 
Best all-around scholar-athlete at English High School 
Award: 
$2,500 available 
Submit: 
Submit a request to the Finance Office. Nominating 
procedure with name, address, date of birth, student 
number, and Social Security number of recipient. All 
requests must be on school/office letterhead. 
 
 
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-12 
Page 13 of 14 
 
 
APPLICATION FOR TRUST FUND 
1. Submit this form for each student receiving a cash or savings 
bond award, or submit a typewritten list with this 
information. 
2. No student can receive a check or savings bond without a 
Social Security number. 
Title of Award: 
Student's Name:  
Student’s Street Address and Apt.#: 
City or Town:  
Zip Code: 
Student’s Date of Birth: 
Student’s Social Security Number: 
Student’s ID Number: 
Name of School:  
School Street Address:  
City or Town:  
Zip Code:  
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-12 
Page 14 of 14 
 
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
 
Date 
Activity 
May 31, 2024 
All requests must be submitted to the Finance 
Office. 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
 
Owner: 
Special Assistant to the Chief of Finance 
Department: 
Finance Office 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9485 
Scan documents to: finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
Email: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
FIN-07 
Version 01 
 
 
 
PURCHASING GUIDELINES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Procurement procedures at BPS follow state and federal laws 
and City policies. Non-compliance with these laws could result in 
invalid procurements and unenforceable contracts. The State 
Procurement Law (M.G.L. c. 30B) mandates standard procedures 
for local jurisdictions to ensure fairness and consistency when 
purchasing supplies or services. The information below provides 
the necessary procedures and requirements for purchasing 
supplies or services following competitive and non-competitive 
procurement regulations. 
INDIVIDUALS AUTHORIZED TO SIGN CONTRACTS ON BEHALF 
OF THE BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS  
No Boston Public School employee, other than those listed 
below, may enter into a contract with any vendor.  This includes 
but is not limited to contracts, agreements, memorandums of 
understanding, grants, partnership agreements, or any other 
expenditure that binds the district to pay for services/goods.  This 
includes purchases of services or goods for under $10,000.   
Only three (3) BPS employees are authorized to enter into 
contracts on behalf of the Boston Public Schools:   


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
• The superintendent of schools  
• The BPS chief financial officer 
• The BPS deputy chief financial officer 
 
1. PURCHASES LESS THAN $10,000. 
The standard for selection: Following M.G.L. c. 30B, § 2 "Sound 
Business Practices,”  the school or department must solicit three 
quotes via telephone, email, catalog, or the City Certified 
Business Directory.  A record of these quotes should be recorded 
on this form and kept on file at the school or department for 
auditing purposes. 
Required document: Requisition 
Authorization: Purchase order 
Turnaround time*: 1 -2 Weeks 
 
2. PURCHASES BETWEEN $10,000 - $100,000 
The standard for selection: When procuring supplies or services 
that are not a sole source or exempt from Chapter 30B, schools 
and departments must solicit written quotes from at least three 
vendors via telephone, email, catalog, or the City Certified 
Business Directory.  A record of these quotes should be recorded 
on this form and kept on file at the school or department for 
auditing purposes. The contract should then be awarded to the 
responsible and responsive supplier offering the needed quality 
of supply or service at the lowest price quotation. In cases when 
obtaining three quotes is impossible despite reasonable effort, 
awarding the contract based on one or two quotes is acceptable. 
Important Note: School districts may still opt to issue an IFB 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
when procuring supplies or services estimated to cost $100,000 
or less. 
Required documents: To ensure a timely and efficient 
procurement process, all required documents should be 
submitted to the Business Office/Procurement office at least four 
weeks before the desired procurement date: requisition, Contract 
Request Form, detailed specifications, and, if applicable, a sole-
source letter addressed to the Business Manager. Before 
submitting, use the detailed checklist to verify that all required 
information has been completed. 
Authorization: Purchase order and written quote contract (WQC), 
signed by the vendor and approved by the superintendent and 
the City auditor. 
Turnaround time*: 2 - 4 Weeks 
3. PURCHASES OF MORE THAN $100,000 
The standard for selection: For supplies or services estimated to 
cost more than $100,000, an invitation for bids (IFB) or a request 
for proposals (RFP) can be used. In a bid process, IFB, you award 
the contract to the qualified bidder who meets your 
specifications and offers you the best price. Information for Bid 
(IFB) Sealed bids (M.G.L. c. 30B, § 5. In a proposal process, RPF, you 
award the contract to the offeror submitting the most 
advantageous proposal, considering your specified evaluation 
criteria and price. Request for Proposals (RFP) Sealed proposals 
(M.G.L. c. 30B, § 6 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
Notice/Advertising Requirements: The Business Services and 
Finance Procurement Unit will submit an ad for schools and 
central departments to be posted at least two weeks before bids 
or proposals are due in the City Records. If the procurement 
exceeds $100,000, an advertisement will be published in the 
Goods and Services Bulletin at least two weeks before bids or 
proposals are due. 
Required documents: Requisition and a completed Contract 
Request Form with a detailed written description of the items or 
services to be purchased. 
Authorization: Purchase order and fully executed contract                               
Turnaround time*: 4 - 8 Weeks 
*NOTE: These timelines may not apply to all procurement 
requests. The turnaround times listed above are approximate and 
do not apply to peak procurement periods, ranging from 08/15 to 
09/30 and 04/15 to 06/30. 
4. MOAS AND MOUS AGREEMENTS 
The following types of agreements are exempt from Chapter 30B 
and do not require a City of Boston standard contract to be 
executed: an agreement between agencies, boards, 
commissions, authorities, departments, or public 
instrumentalities of one city or town (ch. 30B§1(7)); or an 
agreement to purchase supplies or services from or to dispose of 
supplies to an agency or instrumentality of the federal 
government, the Commonwealth, or any of its political 
subdivisions or any other state or political subdivision thereof (ch. 
30B§1(9)) 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
• Memoranda of Agreement (MOA), in addition to outlining 
the terms and obligations of each government agency, 
requires payment or exchange or transfer of funds between 
the parties. There are only to be used between two or more 
government agencies. If one or more of the parties to the 
agreement is not a government agency, then the normal 
rules related to standard contracts apply. There is no dollar 
threshold for an MOA.  
All MOAs must be initially reviewed by the BPS Law 
Department, signed by the City Corporation Counsel and 
City Auditing, and necessary signer(s) involved in the 
agreement before it can be accepted as a valid contractual 
agreement.  
• Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) is an agreement of 
terms and obligations that does not include funds transfer 
between the parties. While parties to an MOA must all be 
government agencies, parties to an MOU may, but are not 
required to be, government agencies.  
All MOUs must be initially reviewed by the BPS Law 
Department, signed by the City Corporation Counsel, and 
necessary signer(s) involved in the agreement before it can 
be accepted as a valid contractual agreement.  
NOTE: The Law Department reserves the right to require City 
departments to execute a formal contract in any situation 
involving agreements with non-government entities. 
Authorization: Purchase order and fully executed and signed 
MOA agreement                               
 
Turnaround time*: 4 - 8 Weeks 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
5. GRANT CONTRACTS 
Under Massachusetts General Law, a “grant agreement” is 
defined as “an agreement between a governmental body and an 
individual or nonprofit entity, the purpose of which is to carry out 
a public purpose of support or stimulation instead of procuring 
supplies or services for the benefit or use of the governmental 
body.” If a grant agreement properly fits within this definition, 
then it is exempt from the requirements of Chapter 30B.  
The first step in the analysis of whether a grant agreement can 
be used is to determine the public purpose of the grant and how 
grant funds are being directly linked back to the public delivery 
of a program. Generally, supporting a non-profit organization, or 
keeping it operational, is not a permissible public purpose. While 
non-profits may operate for the public good, grant funds must be 
directly linked back to the specific delivery of a program. Please 
review this Law Department memo for further considerations 
and guidance when determining whether a grant process is 
applicable. If you plan to conduct a grant process because each 
case is evaluated individually, please contact the BPS Office of 
the Legal Advisor at 617-635-9320. 
6. EMERGENCY PURCHASES 
In the case of an unforeseen emergency, if complying with all of 
Chapter 30B's requirements would put people or property at risk, 
you are allowed to procure the necessary item or service without 
full compliance. However, it is important to keep a record of the 
emergency procurement, including the reason for deeming it an 
emergency, the supplier's name, the contract amount and type, 
and a list of the supplies or services purchased under each 
contract. Additionally, document any procedures used to elicit 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
competition. It is important to inform the Business Services 
Procurement Unit of the emergency purchases as soon as 
possible. Please refer to the Goods and Services Bulletin for 
further guidance on processing and emergency procurement.  
7. FOOD PURCHASES 
Food purchases are allowed for events where parents, suppliers, 
constituents, and community members attend — not just 
students, teachers, or the superintendent. If it's a fund 100, it 
must be purchased against the following food budget, 53204.  If 
using fund 200, please check with Yvonne Macrae, Director of 
Grants and External Funds, ymacrae@bostonpublicschools.org, 
to ensure that the grant rules allow food purchases.  Please 
review Superintendent's Circular FIN-03 and additional 
guidelines on reimbursements for food purchases. 
8. REAL PROPERTY – ACQUISITIONS AND DISPOSITIONS –
M.G.L. C. 30B 
Real Property Acquisitions and Dispositions: After determining 
the value of the acquisitions and disposing of the real property 
valued over $35,000.00, an invitation for bids (IFB) or a request for 
proposals (RFP) can be used. In a bid process, an IFB can select 
the proposer who meets your quality requirements and offers the 
lowest price. Information for Bid (IFB) Sealed bids (M.G.L. c. 30B, § 
5. In a proposal process, an RPF will allow you to compare the 
relative merits of the proposals you receive and the price. 
Request for Proposals (RFP) Sealed proposals (M.G.L. c. 30B, § 6 . 
Contact Business Services for further information on when to use 
a license or a lease.  
Notice/Advertising Requirements: The Business Services and 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
Finance Procurement Unit will submit an ad to be published in 
the Central Register at least 30 days before executing a binding 
agreement to acquire the property. M.G.L. c. 30B, § 16(d)  
Authorization: Purchase order and fully executed contract                               
Turnaround time*: 4 - 8 Weeks 
 
RESOURCES 
BPS Legal Advisor 
Legal Advisor  legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
617-635-1577 
Computer Equipment 
OIIT: Director of Technology Business Operations Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
617-635-9190 
Educational and Administrative Applications 
OIIT: Director of Technology Business Operations, Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
617-635-9190 
Purchasing, Textbook Adoptions 
Business Services: Assistant Business Manager 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 617-635-8207 
PeopleSoft/Financials Training 
Business Services: Assistant Business Manager) 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 617-635-8207 
Furniture and Rugs 
Facilities Mgt.:  


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
Operations-Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 617-
635-9119 
Playground Equipment 
Facilities Mgt.:  
Operations-Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
617-635-9117 
Grants/External Funds 
Director of State & Federal Grants finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org617-635-9577 
Field Trips 
Transportation: Executive Director of Transportation 
Operations-Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 617-
635-9000 
Budget Management 
Assistant Budget Director, finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
617-635-6984 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Assistant Business Manager 
Department: 
Business Services 
Mailing Address: Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-8207 
Email: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
• Essential Training Guide is available here. 
• Business Services Guide is available here. 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FIN-20 
Version 01 
 
MANAGING YOUR STIPENDS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Please use the Budget Office /Stipends reference document as 
your guide to initiating online stipend requests.  
 
DEFINITION OF STIPEND WORK FOR UNION POSITIONS (BTU, 
BASAS, GUILD) 
● Stipend work consists of activities that are distinct and 
separate from an individual’s job and not an extension of it.  
○ Some examples of stipend work include staff training 
beyond the contractual PD and Saturday or evening 
schools for teachers.  
● Stipend work is not to be performed during the period of 
time that constitutes the normal workday.  
● For BASAS staff, they must perform their school day hours 
for the year prior to being eligible for a stipend.  
 
DEFINITION OF STIPEND WORK FOR MANAGERIAL POSITIONS 
— SCHOOLS 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 2 of 13 
 
 
● Stipend work consists of activities that are distinct and 
separate from an individual’s job and not an extension of it. 
School-based managerial employees cannot receive a 
stipend unless their contractual school days (223) are 
completed. Stipend work is not to be performed during the 
period of time that constitutes the normal workday.  
● These stipends must be for activities that are outside of the 
job description of the managerial employee.  
● Stipend opportunities for managerial employees in schools 
must be posted in the school or on TalentEd.  
● To authorize a stipend request for an individual in a 
leadership position, Tiers D through F, the submitter will be 
required to attach one of the following to their request: the 
supervisor’s written approval, a signed superintendent’s 
memo, or an email approving the work. 
DEFINITION OF STIPEND WORK FOR MANAGERIAL POSITIONS 
— CENTRAL OFFICE 
● Stipend work consists of activities that are distinct and 
separate from an individual’s job and not an extension of it.  
● Stipend work is not to be performed during the period of 
time that constitutes the normal workday.  
● Managerial employees in central offices are only eligible to 
receive stipends that have been posted through the Office 
of Human Capital. These stipends must be for activities that 
are outside of the job description of the managerial 
employee.  
● Central office managerial employees may not apply for 
stipends unless they have been posted on TalentEd via the 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 3 of 13 
 
 
Office of Human Capital. Please connect with your OHC 
staffing manager if you are interested in posting a stipend 
opportunity on TalentEd. 
● To authorize a stipend request for an individual in a 
leadership position, Tiers D through F, the submitter will be 
required to attach one of the following to their request: the 
supervisor’s written approval, a signed superintendent’s 
memo, or an email approving the work. 
DEFINITION OF STIPEND WORK FOR SCHOOL LEADERS 
● Stipend work consists of activities that are distinct and 
separate from an individual’s job and not an extension of it.  
● Stipend work is not to be performed during the period of 
time that constitutes the normal workday.  
● School leader stipends must be for activities that are outside 
of the job description of the school leader.  
● In order for a school leader to receive a stipend, it must be 
either posted on TalentEd or the stipend request must be 
submitted along with a signed memo to the 
superintendent.  
DEFINITION OF STIPEND POSTING 
Stipend work must be offered to individuals at schools in 
accordance with the policies of the School Committee. 
Specifically, the work must be distributed equitably and based on 
demonstrated competence and qualifications.  
In schools, stipend opportunities must be posted to the staff. 
These postings may be internal to the school, so long as all non-


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 4 of 13 
 
 
managerial employees at the school have the opportunity to 
apply. An email to all school staff is an appropriate method of 
posting. OHC or Budget may ask for proof of posting at any time 
after a stipend authorization request (formerly referred to as a 
PS08) has been submitted. School-based managerial staff may 
apply to their school’s internal posting if eligible. School-based 
stipend opportunities can be posted on TalentEd as well. 
In central office departments, stipend opportunities must also be 
posted. These postings must be done through the Office of 
Human Capital. Central office managerial employees may not 
apply for stipends unless they have been posted on TalentEd via 
the Office of Human Capital.  
AUTHORIZATION TOOLS  
Stipend Authorization Request (SAR) – request for authorization 
before work starts (must be submitted at least two weeks prior to 
the first day of work). SARs for summer work should be 
submitted before the end of May. If an SAR is submitted after the 
work has started, the submitter is required to provide an 
explanation as part of the request. 
Pay Certification Request (formerly referred to as a PS09) – 
request for payment after work is completed (must be submitted 
no later than two weeks after the work is completed).  If an SPC is 
submitted after the work has started, the submitter is required to 
provide an explanation as part of the request. 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 5 of 13 
 
 
SCHEDULE FOR AUTHORIZATION 
Department heads or principals should plan in advance and 
request SARs on time.  
● SARs must be submitted at least two weeks before work 
starts, except in the case of summer work. If a stipend is 
requested late, the submitter will have to write in an 
explanation when prompted in the online system.  
● SARs for summer work should be submitted before the end 
of May.  
● Pay certification requests should be submitted no later than 
two weeks after the work has ended.  
● Pay certification requests that need to be processed in the 
last paycheck in June must be submitted by the Wednesday 
prior to the pay period end date.  
 
In addition, due to the Budget Collaborative and Probable Org 
schedule between December and February, please allow 
additional time for SAR approvals and submit them at least three 
weeks before work starts. 
AUTHORIZATION PROCESS  
All stipend work must be authorized in advance by the Office of 
Human Capital and Budget Office.  
Authorization from Budget and HC must be received via the 
approved SAR before the work starts. A department head does 
not have independent authority to authorize stipend work. 
Departments or schools are responsible for informing employees 
when a pay certification request has been submitted for 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 6 of 13 
 
 
payment. Please review the stipend guidance around submitting 
SARs and pay certification requests. Additional guidance on the 
stipend process can be found on the Budget Office 
Resources/Stipends page. 
WORKFLOW FOR STIPENDS 
1. Stipend work opportunity is posted (internally for schools 
and on TalentEd for central office) and individuals are 
chosen to perform this work. 
2. Secretary or department head’s designee originates stipend 
authorization request (SAR). 
a. Submitter cannot be one of the employees to receive a 
stipend. 
b. Submitter must complete the authorization process for 
all individuals that are flagged. This could include the 
following: 
i. Tier C, D, E, or F Managerial employees (will 
require approval by department head or division 
lead to be submitted along with the SAR) 
ii. School Leaders 
iii. Employees outside of the submitter’s department 
iv. Submitter must provide an explanation for any 
late requests 
3. Principal or department head gives first-level approval. 
4. HC reviews to confirm the below items for approval (please 
also see Process and Selection section for additional details 
on the OHC approval process): 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 7 of 13 
 
 
a. That the submitter isn’t a recipient of the stipend 
b. That the opportunity has been posted appropriately 
c. That the employee is eligible to receive the stipend 
d. That the Superintendent’s Memo has been submitted if 
the stipend is for school leaders. 
5. Payroll reviews to again confirm that the employee is 
eligible to receive the stipend. 
6. Budget reviews to confirm the below guidelines for 
approval: 
a. That there are enough funds available in the budget to 
cover the expense 
b. That the stipend funding information is correct, such as 
the budget year 
c. That the stipend is allowable under the grant if it is in 
fund 200 
d. That the commitment letter (which includes a 
description of the work, the staff member’s name, and 
the amount of the stipend) is attached to the stipend 
authorization request form (SAR) for Reimbursable 
grant stipends. 
e. That the hours worked are included if the stipend is 
above $5,000 for an individual 
f. That the budget director approves the stipend if it is 
above $10,000 for an individual 
7. Department or school should regularly monitor their 
stipend request for approval status updates. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 8 of 13 
 
 
8. Secretary or department head’s designee informs employee 
that work can start. 
9. Time sheets are maintained in the school or department 
and may be subject to periodic audits. 
10. Department head or principal monitors completion and 
quality of work. 
11. Work ends. 
12. Secretary or department head’s designee submits pay 
certification, due the Wednesday before the pay period end 
date. 
13. Payroll processes pay certification requests and checks for 
the following (see Payroll Guidelines, below): 
a. Confirm that the funds don’t go out prior to the end 
date. 
14. Stipend is paid to employee as a supplement to regular 
paycheck. 
NOTE: If an employee is listed on more than one eForm for 
various stipends, they cannot be paid out in the same pay period. 
A warning notice will appear when trying to add the additional 
stipend. Will have to hold that payment until the employee has 
been paid out by the other in-process pay certification request. 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 9 of 13 
 
 
BUDGET GUIDELINES 
All stipends and overtime payments are paid out of account 
51202.  
Stipend Authorization Requests (SAR): 
● Departments are responsible for tracking their original 
budget in 51202 and the SAR approvals that have been 
issued against this original budget. Contact your Financial 
Analyst if you have questions about your available funds for 
stipends. 
● SAR approvals do not “encumber” funds in the All Funds 
report. All 51202 funds will appear to be available until the 
pay certifications are paid out. In your All Funds report, 
please do not depend on the “Available” amount in account 
51202 to track stipends. Stipend requests must be tracked 
by the department; the Stipend Tracker template can be 
found here. 
● For all single stipend payments that amount to $5,000 or 
more per individual, please fill out the hourly rate portion of 
the SAR eForm.  
 
Stipend Pay Certification Requests: 
● Processed Stipend Pay Certification Requests will move 
funds from the Available budget to the Expense line.  
● It is possible to issue partial payment on a Stipend Pay 
Certification Requests if only some of the work was 
completed, or if only some of the employees should be paid. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 10 of 13 
 
 
● If the work ends early and you are paying out the full 
stipend before the end date on the form, you must leave a 
note to explain this on the Stipend Pay Certification 
Request. 
 
Stipends paid from grants: 
● Any stipend payments being made from a grant funding 
source need to be for work done during the grant time 
period. Stipends cannot be paid for work that may have 
begun before the start date of the grant or continuing after 
the grant end date. 
● All stipends on grants must be allowable under the grant, 
and it is the responsibility of the school or department to 
ensure that they are complying with grant guidelines. 
● For Reimbursable grant stipends, attach the commitment 
letter (which includes a description of the work, the staff 
member’s name, and the amount of the stipend) to the 
stipend authorization request form (SAR). 
PROCESS AND SELECTION 
● Departments must ensure that the activities covered by 
overtime and stipend requests meet and conform to the 
definitions listed at the top of this circular.  
● Departments are expected to internally post and advertise 
opportunities to ensure that individuals do not receive a 
disproportionate share of overtime and stipend 
assignments.  


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 11 of 13 
 
 
● For stipends that managerial employees in central offices 
may receive, the posting must be done via the Office of 
Human Capital. 
● Departments are expected to select qualified individuals 
and make selections in an equitable way. 
● Departments must ensure that the work is done in a 
complete and satisfactory way before issuing authorization 
for payment.  
● Timesheets are required for those working overtime or 
stipended hours.  
● Timesheets for all stipends and overtime must be retained 
in a central location at the department for 7 years. 
The Office of Human Capital may inquire with a department to 
be sure that it is specifically conforming to these guidelines and 
procedures. 
SINGLE OR CUMULATIVE PAYMENT THRESHOLDS 
In circumstances where the single payment to an individual or 
the sum of payments in one fiscal year to an individual meets the 
thresholds in the table below, there is an additional approval 
requirement. 
 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 12 of 13 
 
 
 
Single or 
Cumulative  
Stipend 
Amount 
Non-Autonomous School  
Approval Process 
 Central Office 
 Approval Process 
Greater than 
or equal to 
$5,000 
Depending on the situation, 
stipend authorization may be 
held at HC or Budget 
approval step for further 
questions. You will be 
required to submit the hours 
worked and hourly rate for 
stipends amounting to $5,000 
or more for an individual. 
Depending on the 
situation, a stipend 
authorization may be held 
at the HC or Budget 
approval step for further 
questions.  
Greater than 
or equal to 
$10,000 
Budget director approval 
required. When submitting a 
stipend authorization that 
amounts to $10,000 or more 
per individual, please fill out 
the hourly rate portion of the 
stipend authorization eForm. 
Please send an email 
explaining the reasons for 
exceeding this threshold to 
your financial analyst in the 
Budget Office. 
Budget director approval 
is required. When 
submitting a stipend 
authorization, please send 
an email explaining the 
reasons for exceeding this 
threshold to your financial 
analyst in the Budget 
Office.  
There are no additional approvals necessary for autonomous 
schools that submit single or cumulative stipends greater than or 
equal to $5,000. 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 13 of 13 
 
 
The stipend thresholds for single or cumulative payments listed 
above are not impacted by: 
● Regular differential payments for employees in a formal 
Extended Learning program 
● Regular differentials for academic coaches or athletic 
coaches 
● Regular differentials for lead teachers 
● Regular payments to instructors in formal Summer School 
and Acceleration Academies 
● Regular inclusion buyback payments for employees who 
use more than one certification while teaching in the 
classroom. 
 
Please use the Budget Office /Stipends reference document as 
your guide to initiating online stipend requests.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Finance 
Department: 
Budget Office 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street. Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9000 
Email: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
FIN-14 
Version 01 
 
 
 
 
RESOLUTION OF OVERPAYMENT OF SALARIES 
FOR FORMER EMPLOYEES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version.  
With the multitude of daily transactions, corrections on both the 
financial and payroll component are warranted. The following 
process must be strictly followed when an overpayment occurs. 
1. When this transaction is identified, notification is 
generated from the payroll unit to the accounting unit. 
2. This notification states the name and the amount of 
the salary overpayment. 
3. Immediate request for payback is forwarded to the 
individual through the United States Post Office and/or 
email by the accounting unit. 
4. To finalize this transaction, the employee is requested 
to return the amount overpaid, payable to the City of 
Boston – Boston Public Schools, Bank Check or Money 
Order. 
5. Upon receipt, the check is deposited with the City 
Treasurer, and the adjustments of the employee’s 
annual wages are activated. 
6. If further resolution is warranted, the employee should 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-14 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
substantiate their claim with supporting 
documentation. In the event of a financial hardship, the 
accounting unit will review the circumstances and 
make a payment plan recommendation to the 
business manager. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Payroll 
Department: 
Office of Human Capital 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 
Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Additional 
Questions 
For additional questions, please submit an 
HR Inquiry Ticket via the Beacon. This can 
be found on Access Boston (finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org). 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
FIN-11 
Version 01 
 
SCHOLARSHIPS, AWARDS, AND HONORS FOR 
STUDENTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version.. 
 
This circular provides procedures for making awards from 
centrally administered trusts that benefit individual students. 
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-12 deals with trusts benefiting 
schools. Fifteen trusts are listed in the attachment to this 
memorandum. Those involving many schools are: 
 
ALICE F. CASEY AWARDS 
  
CHARLOTTE FELLMAN AWARDS MARY DOROTHEA  
DEVEREAUX AWARDS  
SAMUEL GROSS DAVIS AWARDS  
MATHEMATICS AWARD  
MARY C. MCLAUGHLIN AWARD  
MARY GRASSA O'NEILL AWARD  
All elementary schools 
All elementary and middle 
schools 
List attached 
List attached 
All schools 
All schools K-12 
All schools 1-12 
 
 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-11 
Page 2 of 17 
 
Principals and heads of schools are responsible for knowing the 
eligibility of their schools and students for scholarships and 
awards, for ensuring that recipients of awards have been 
appropriately selected, and for following procedures for the 
disbursement of the awards. Please submit your requests to the 
Chief Financial Office as soon as possible but no later than May 31, 
2024. Late requests will not be processed.  
 
 
ELIGIBILITY FOR AWARDS 
See the following pages for a list of awards by level and school 
and for a description of awards listed in alphabetical order. 
 
SELECTION PROCEDURES 
In addition to criteria specific to each trust, equal opportunity 
policies apply to selection procedures. 
● Teachers, or a committee of teachers, recommend a 
nominee. 
● The head of school or principal approves nomination(s). 
 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-11 
Page 3 of 17 
 
 
DISBURSEMENT PROCEDURES 
● Provide the information required for the award on the 
attached application form OR on the letterhead of the 
school, signed by the principal/head of school. If schools 
are eligible for more than one award, use separate 
letterhead for each award. 
● Submit the memorandum to the Chief Financial Office by 
May 31, 2024; late submissions will not be funded.  
● Checks will be sent directly to the recipients at the 
address provided by the school. Checks cannot be issued 
without a Social Security number. All monetary awards are 
disbursed through the City of Boston Trust Office.  
● Present the awards at a suitable ceremony developed 
within each school. 
● Maintain records of receipt of awards. Schools should 
maintain records of receipts by students, and copies of all 
submissions. If it is not possible to obtain a signature, 
maintain a dated record of the name, address and method 
of transmittal. Documentation of receipts should be 
available upon request. 
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-11 
Page 4 of 17 
 
TRUST AWARDS 
Aznive 
Grace N. Aznive 
Casey 
Alice F. Casey 
Davis 
Samuel Gross Davis 
Devereaux 
Mary Dorothea Devereaux 
Fellman 
Charlotte Fellman 
Franklin 
Benjamin Franklin 
GeorgeAnna 
Judson George 
Goldberg 
Jacob Goldberg 
Goulston 
Edward J. Goulston 
Hoffman 
Ensign David A. Hoffman 
Latin 
Latin School Prize 
Lawrence 
Lawrence High School 
Lawrence Latin 
Lawrence Latin School 
Mathematics 
Mathematics Award 
McLaughlin 
Mary McLaughlin 
Morrison 
Helen C. Morrison 
Grassa O’Neill 
Grassa O’Neill 
 
 
TRUST AWARDS BY SCHOOL 
 
ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS 
All Elementary Schools 
Alice F. Casey 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-11 
Page 5 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
Charlotte Fellman 
Mathematics Achievement  
Mary McLaughlin Reading 
 
Mary Grassa O’Neill 
Mason Elementary 
Samuel Gross Davis 
Tobin K-8  
Samuel Gross Davis 
Eliot K-8 
Jacob Goldberg 
Winship Elementary 
Mary Dorothea Devereaux 
Ellis Elementary 
Samuel Gross Davis 
Hale Elementary 
Samuel Gross Davis 
Hennigan Elementary 
Samuel Gross Davis 
Higginson/Lewis K-8  
Samuel Gross Davis 
J. F. Kennedy Elementary 
Samuel Gross Davis 
Trotter Elementary 
Samuel Gross Davis 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-11 
Page 6 of 17 
 
 
MIDDLE SCHOOLS 
All Middle Schools 
 
 
 
 
Mary Dorothea Devereaux 
Charlotte Fellman 
Mathematics Achievement  
Mary McLaughlin Reading 
 
Mary Grassa O’Neill 
Dearborn Middle 
Samuel Gross Davis 
Higginson/Lewis K-8 
Samuel Gross Davis 
Timilty Middle 
Samuel Gross Davis 
 
 
HIGH SCHOOLS 
All High Schools 
 
 
 
 
 
Mary Dorothea Devereaux 
Grace Aznive Art Scholarship 
Franklin Medal 
Mathematics Achievement  
Mary McLaughlin Reading 
Mary Grassa O’Neill 
Boston Latin School 
Samuel Gross Davis 
Lawrence Latin School 
Latin School Prize 
Boston Latin Academy 
Samuel Gross Davis 
Brighton High 
Anna Judson George 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-11 
Page 7 of 17 
 
English High 
Edward J. Goulston 
Lawrence High School Fund 
Madison Park High/Technical/ Vocational 
High School 
Samuel Gross Davis 
O’Bryant School of Mathematics & Science 
Samuel Gross Davis 
Helen C. Morrison 
Carter School 
Samuel Gross Davis 
 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-11 
Page 8 of 17 
 
TRUST AWARD DESCRIPTIONS 
 
AZNIVE ART SCHOLARSHIP FUND in memory of Grace Aznive, a 
former BPS teacher, was established in 1955. The scholarship is for 
outstanding seniors planning to attend art school. Please call 617-
635-6769 for more information. 
 
CASEY AWARD in honor of Alice F. Casey, a former associate 
superintendent of the Boston Public Schools, was established 
1977. 
Eligibility: 
All elementary schools, one student in each classroom, grades 1-5 
Criteria: 
Elementary students who have demonstrated the highest degree of 
social and academic growth during the school year and have shown 
outstanding and positive attitudes toward classmates of all racial and 
ethnic backgrounds while promoting a positive spirit of integration 
within their classroom and school community. Current satisfactory 
grades in conduct and effort and improved grades in class work or report 
card; concern for students and staff; participation in school activities; 
helpful and enthusiastic attitude; recognition of rights of others. 
Award: 
Alice F. Casey Certificate 
Submit: 
Submit request to Chief Financial Office on school letterhead, with 
number of certificates needed. 
 
 
DEVEREAUX AWARD is a gift of Mary Dorothea Devereaux, 
formerly a Boston Public Schools teacher, established in 1965. 
Eligibility: 
One girl and one boy in the graduating class of the following schools: 
● 
All high schools 
● 
All middle schools 
● 
Winship Elementary School 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-11 
Page 9 of 17 
 
Criteria: 
For students who, as a result of the tutelage of their teachers, have 
exhibited exemplary personal development and growth of character. 
Under no circumstances shall scholastic achievement or athletic ability 
be used as criteria. 
Award: 
$25 check, issued by the City of Boston Treasury Department. 
Submit: 
Submit request to Chief Financial Office on school letterhead with names, 
addresses, dates of birth, student numbers and Social Security numbers 
of recipients. 
 
FELLMAN AWARD is in honor of Charlotte Fellman, a former 
associate director of music, established 1984. 
Eligibility: 
Two graduating eighth grade students from each middle school and each 
K-8 school and one graduating fifth grade student from each elementary 
school. 
Criteria: 
Outstanding talent and positive social attitude toward classmates of all 
racial and ethnic backgrounds; participation in the musical life of the 
school or community; interest in continuing in music; outstanding 
musical talent and helpful and enthusiastic attitude toward classmates. 
Award: 
Certificate of Recognition 
Submit: 
Submit request to Chief Financial Office on school letterhead, with 
number of certificates needed. 
 
 
FRANKLIN CERTIFICATE is a gift of Benjamin Franklin. 
Eligibility: 
All high schools 
Criteria: 
High rank in scholarship and conduct 
Award: 
A certificate 
Submit: 
Nominating procedure, and name and address of recipients. 
Nominations submitted to the Guidance Department. 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-11 
Page 10 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GEORGE SCHOLARSHIP is in memory of Anna Judson George 
and was established 1923. 
Eligibility: 
A graduating senior from Brighton High School 
Criteria: 
For excellence in English, to be used for their higher education 
Award: 
$225 check payable to recipient 
Submit: 
Submit request to Chief Financial Office on school letterhead with names, 
addresses, dates of birth, student numbers and Social Security numbers 
of recipients. 
 
GOLDBERG TRUST is in honor of Jacob Goldberg upon the 
occasion of completion of 50 years of outstanding service to his 
employer, W. M. Filene & Sons Company. This trust was 
established in 1962. 
Eligibility: 
A member of the graduating class of the Eliot School 
Criteria: 
For leadership qualities 
Award: 
$400 check payable to recipient 
Submit: 
Submit request to Chief Financial Office on school letterhead with name, 
address, date of birth, student number and Social Security number of 
recipient. 
 
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-11 
Page 11 of 17 
 
 
GOULSTON AWARD is in memory of Edward S. Goulston and was 
established in 1929. 
Eligibility: 
A member of the graduating class of English High School 
Criteria: 
Deserving pupil to be used for their higher education 
Award: 
$250 check; payable to recipient 
Submit: 
Submit request to Chief Financial Office on school letterhead with name, 
address, date of birth, student number and Social Security number of 
recipient. 
 
 
HOFFMAN SCHOLARSHIP is in memory of Ensign David A. 
Hoffman and was established in 1920. 
 
 
Eligibility: 
A member of the graduating class of East Boston High School 
Criteria: 
A scholar who most nearly combines the highest attributes of an all 
around student in studies, athletic ability and morality. 
Award: 
$175 check; payable to recipient 
Submit: 
Submit request to Chief Financial Office on school letterhead with name, 
address, date of birth, student number and Social Security number of 
recipient. 
 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-11 
Page 12 of 17 
 
 
 
LATIN SCHOOL PRIZE is for the encouragement of scholars at 
Boston Latin School. 
Eligibility: 
Students from Boston Latin School 
Criteria: 
Excellence in scholarship 
Award: 
$250 total available, check payable to student(s) 
Submit: 
Submit request to Chief Financial Office on school letterhead with name, 
address, date of birth, student number and Social Security number of 
recipient. 
 
 
LAWRENCE HIGH SCHOOL FUND is from a gift of Abbott 
Lawrence in 1844. 
Eligibility: 
Students from English High School 
Criteria: 
High rank in various subjects of the course of study 
Award: 
$525 total available, checks payable to the student(s) 
Submit: 
Submit request to Chief Financial Office on school letterhead with name, 
address, date of birth, student number and Social Security number of 
recipient. 
 
 
 
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-11 
Page 13 of 17 
 
 
LAWRENCE LATIN SCHOOL FUND is from a gift of Abbott 
Lawrence in 1845. 
Eligibility: 
Students from Boston Latin School 
Criteria: 
High rank in various subjects of literature and science 
Award: 
$475 total available, checks payable to the student(s) 
Submit: 
Submit request to Chief Financial Office on school letterhead with name, 
address, date of birth, student number and Social Security number of 
recipient. 
 
MORRISON FUND is a legacy of Helen C. Morrison, established in 
1972. 
Eligibility: 
Students from Technical High Schools 
Criteria: 
To assist worthy and needy students at technical high schools; funds can 
be used either to assist students currently attending technical high 
schools in Boston or as scholarships at an institution of higher learning. 
Award: 
$2,525 total available; check(s) payable to recipient(s) 
Submit: 
Submit request to Chief Financial Office on school letterhead with name, 
address, date of birth, student number and Social Security number of 
recipient. 
 
MARY GRASSA O’NEILL WRITING AWARD: The Boston School 
Committee and Superintendent Mary Skipper wish to award 
certificates to selected students in recognition of achievement in 
writing. Schools should make requests for certificates directly to 
the Program Director/ELA, OPL@bostonpublicschools.org. These 
certificates will be sent directly to your school, and the schools 
will complete the certificates for distribution to selected 
students.  
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-11 
Page 14 of 17 
 
MATHEMATICS ACHIEVEMENT AWARD: The Boston School 
Committee and  
Superintendent Mary Skipper wish to award certificates to 
selected students in recognition of achievement in mathematics. 
Schools should make requests for certificates directly to the 
Program Director, Mathematics, OPL@bostonpublicschools.org. 
These certificates will be sent directly to your school, and the 
schools will complete the certificates for distribution to selected 
students.    
 
MARY C. MCLAUGHLIN READING AWARD: The Boston School 
Committee and  
Superintendent Mary Skipper wish to award certificates to 
selected students in recognition of achievement in 
reading/language arts. Schools should make requests for 
certificates directly to the Program Director/ELA, 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org. These certificates will be sent 
directly to your school, and the schools will complete the 
certificates for distribution to selected students.    
 
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
May 31, 2024 
All requests must be submitted to the CFO. 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-11 
Page 15 of 17 
 
Owner: 
Special Assistant to the Chief of Finance 
Department: 
Chief Financial Office  
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9485 
Scan Documents to 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
Email: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
ATTACHMENT: 
Application for Awards form 
 
 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-11 
Page 16 of 17 
 
APPLICATION FOR AWARDS 
 
This form may be used for each student receiving a cash / savings 
bond award; or submit a typewritten list on school letterhead 
with all of this information. No student may receive a check or 
savings bond without a Social Security number.  
 
TITLE OF AWARD: 
_____________________________________________________ 
 
 
STUDENT'S NAME:  
____________________________________________________ 
 
 
STUDENT’S STREET ADDRES 
______________________________________________ APT.#:____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CITY OR TOWN: ___________________________ZIP CODE: _________ 
 
 
STUDENT’S DATE OF BIRTH 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-11 
Page 17 of 17 
 
____________________________________________ 
 
 
STUDENT’S SSN: 
______________________________________________ 
 
 
STUDENT’S ID NUMBER: 
______________________________________________ 
 
 
SCHOOL: 
______________________________________________________ 
 
 
SCHOOL STREET ADDRESS: 
__________________________________________ 
 
 
CITY OR TOWN: ______________________ ZIP CODE: _____________ 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FIN-09 
Version 01 
 
 
PRIVATE CONTRIBUTIONS MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS PRIVATE CONTRIBUTIONS 
All external funding — to the district as a whole, individual 
schools, central offices, or fiscal sponsorship — that is received 
from private sources, such as foundation grants, contributions, 
and individual donations other than public state and federal 
grants, must adhere to the established rules and guidelines set 
forth in this circular. 
Schools may not receive cash grants directly into activity 
accounts or any other accounts maintained by the school (see 
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04, Student Activity Accounts). 
Schools and departments may solicit in-kind services and 
contributions from private sources (businesses, non-profit 
foundations, and individuals) to be made to the Boston Public 
Schools via the Boston Educational Development Foundation, 
Inc. (BEDF) in accordance with the guidelines set forth in State 
Ethics Commission opinion EC-COI-12-1. Programs funded by 
private philanthropy must further BPS goals. Funds will not be 
accepted from sources specifically precluded by the School 
Committee (there are no fund sources specifically precluded at 
this time). 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-09 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
 
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
All private funds must comply with funders’ intentions and 
guidelines established by BEDF regarding programming, 
spending, accounting, and auditing, as well as related to civil 
rights, access, and confidentiality as per the public use of these 
funds. 
The program supervisor is the individual who will be responsible 
for overseeing the program(s) or initiative that private 
contributions are funding. 
The fund manager is the department head or the respective 
principal/head of school and/or a designee and will be the 
primary point of contact for all management issues for BEDF. The 
fund manager will take fiscal responsibility for managing private 
contributions and assure the submission of proper reporting to 
funders. 
BEDF has fiduciary and financial oversight responsibility for 
private-funded programs, including compliance with all relevant 
regulations and reporting. BEDF must sign contracts and other 
legal documents that could raise a liability and oversee the full 
execution of grant agreements and/or award letters. BEDF will 
follow guidelines set by its Board of Directors and funders’ 
restrictions and will collaborate to comply with other 
requirements related to civil rights, access, and confidentiality. 
ABOUT BEDF  


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-09 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
Mission 
The Boston Educational Development Foundation, Inc. (BEDF) 
was founded in 1984 by the superintendent and School 
Committee for departments and schools to improve their ability 
to raise money from private sources including foundations, 
corporations, and individuals.  
BEDF is a 501(c)(3) that exists to improve educational 
opportunities for the students of BPS. BEDF provides fiscal 
sponsorship and fundraising support for programs and 
opportunities that may otherwise not be possible, such as: out of 
school time; enrichment and health initiatives for students; 
leadership and professional development for teachers; 
engagement and learning programs for families; and multiple 
academic initiatives.  
Fiscal Sponsorship Services 
BEDF provides general, financial, and administrative 
management and staffing to private-funded programs that 
further the educational aims and goals of BPS. BEDF also 
provides fundraising support in the following areas: grant 
seeking and administration; assistance in grants review and 
submission; and the creation of online fundraising campaigns for 
schools and programs. 
Indirect Rate 
BEDF charges an 8% indirect rate on all grants, donations, 
sponsorships, and other charitable contributions for which BEDF 
serves as the fiscal sponsor. This indirect rate does not apply to 
any BPS student scholarships. The BEDF Board of Directors has 
the authority to change the rate at any time by giving written 
notice to Fund Managers.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-09 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
 
PRE-AWARD 
All BPS staff, parents, and partners are encouraged to seek and 
apply for private funding opportunities from a variety of sources. 
School fundraising is a team process within the 
department/school to enable those individuals who will 
ultimately be responsible for implementing the programs to be 
involved. Heads of schools, principals, and other administrative 
heads must be aware of and approve private solicitations for 
programs that will take place under their supervision.  
Intent to Apply 
All BPS entities planning to pursue a private funding opportunity 
must submit an online Intent to Apply Form (for asks above 
$10,000) 1-3 months prior to the deadline for submission, if 
possible. This will ensure that potential funding applications are 
consistent with BPS goals and are not in conflict with other BPS 
solicitations to the same agencies and funders. 
The Intent to Apply Form will be revised on a weekly basis by the 
cross-functional BPS Grants Review Team and will communicate 
a recommendation to the applicant. Upon confirmation, you will 
receive a completed grant cover page to be signed by your 
department head/supervisor. For grant applications seeking 
letters of support, a brief form will be attached as well. 
POST AWARD 
BEDF holds private funds through a set of strictly segregated 
funds (previously called accounts). Either fund managers or 
funders must forward the award letter and/or grant agreement 
(that includes program and budget information) along with the 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-09 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
deposit form to BEDF. If a new account is needed, the fund 
manager should submit the proper form. BEDF will notify within 
five business days upon receipt.  
SPENDING, MONITORING, AND REPORTING 
Spending 
Funds held at BEDF will adhere to BEDF current spending, 
financial, and administrative policies regarding accounts 
receivable and payable, employee stipend documentation, and 
any other administrative controls established. For privately 
funded programs, BEDF only compensates individuals as 
independent contractors (1099) or through the BPS approved 
commitment letter process (if individuals are BPS employees). 
Individuals are subject to applicable state and federal taxes. 
Programs will keep their own records to comply with applicable 
BPS regulations. Please contact BEDF at admin@bedf.org for 
detailed information.  
The BEDF executive director must co-sign all contracts and other 
documents in which BEDF could incur liability, legal exposure, or 
financial obligations, including purchase orders and grant 
agreements, on behalf of the programs. 
For internal controls, all expenses require signoff by the fund 
managers or designee before any costs can be incurred or 
payments released. 
The fund manager is responsible for monitoring the spending of 
the private funds. This includes assuring that the funds are being 
used for allowable expenses; spending according to the 
contribution timeline; entering receipt for goods/services; and 
submitting invoices to BEDF for all matters related to their 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-09 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
program budget. In case private-funded program budgets need 
to be amended, they should get approval from the funder. BEDF 
will ensure these responsibilities are fully completed in 
accordance with the provisions of the funder and these 
guidelines. 
Monitoring 
Fund managers are responsible for preparing and submitting 
interim reports as requested by funders. BEDF will support 
completions and take the appropriate steps to ensure timely 
report submission. 
Programmatic grant reports are the responsibility of the fund 
manager who is overseeing the program being funded. Fund 
managers must send a copy of completed reports to BEDF. 
Final Reports 
BEDF will produce a financial report to be finalized and 
complemented with program outcomes by the fund manager in 
order to complete and submit a final report as per the funder 
guidelines. Please submit a copy of the final version to BEDF for 
record keeping purposes. BEDF will take proper measures to 
assure fiduciary responsibility to funders, including freezing the 
activity of the fund until submission is complete. 
AUDITING 
The fund manager and program supervisor will collaborate with 
auditors, consultants, and program advisors as requested by 
BEDF to ensure compliance with tax regulations and impact 
assessment of the partnership with BPS, including site visits and 
data collection efforts.  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-09 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
For general inquiries, please email admin@bedf.org.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner 
Email 
Executive Director, BEDF 
 admin@bedf.org 
Director of Finance and 
Operations, BEDF 
 admin@bedf.org 
Assistant Director of 
Finance, BEDF 
 admin@bedf.org 
Resource Development & 
Communications Manager, 
BEDF 
 admin@bedf.org 
Finance Associate, BEDF 
 admin@bedf.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER:  
FIN-02 
Version 01 
 
 
MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENT 
 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Boston Public School employees who are eligible for mileage 
reimbursement are required by IRS regulation to document 
those costs and provide specific information. Reimbursement 
cannot be made unless all procedures detailed in this circular are 
followed, and all necessary documentation is provided. 
 
All employees who use their own vehicle on authorized school 
business are entitled to be reimbursed as listed below.  Please 
note that travel to and from home is not eligible for 
reimbursement. 
 
 
All Itinerant Service Providers 
School Psychologists, District Social 
Workers, Speech & Language 
Pathologists, Occupational Therapists, 
Physical Therapists, Adaptive Physical 
Education Teachers, Vision Teachers 
 
$600.00 per “full” 
school year (flat 
rate)  
or 
65.5¢ per mile for 
period 7/01/23 thru 
12/31/23 
 
All other BTU members 
 
65.5¢ per mile for 
period 7/01/23 thru 
12/31/23 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-02 
Page 2 of 5 
 
  
 
 
Supervisors of Attendance    
                      
 
65.5¢ per mile for 
period 7/01/23 thru 
12/31/23 
 
 
 
BASAS 
 
 
 
65.5¢ per mile for 
period 7/01/23 thru 
12/31/23 
 
 
 
Management 
 
 
 
65.5¢ per mile for 
period 7/01/23 thru 
12/31/23 
 
 
 
 
Planning & Engineering   
       
 
$15.00 per day (flat 
rate) 
 
 
 
For eligible mileage reimbursement, there must be a sufficient 
appropriation in the respective responsibility center manager’s 
budget (Account 52803 Mileage). 
 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-02 
Page 3 of 5 
 
  
 
IMPORTANT! 
Parking fees, tolls, other transportation fares; Lyfts/Ubers, MBTA 
individual fares only (monthly passes are not reimbursable) etc., 
will be reimbursed only when it is clearly stated that the trip 
taken, which resulted in these fees, was for official school 
business and the method of transport was the most 
economical.  Original receipts must be produced/provided for 
reimbursement. 
 
 
Follow the procedures below to submit for reimbursement 
(Emails accepted): 
 
1. Submit a completed “City of Boston Special Draft/Non Order 
Form” – it must be filled out completely with: 
• School/Department 
• Date 
• Full name of the person being reimbursed 
• Full address of the person being reimbursed 
• Vendor # 
• Funding source 
• Full “detailed” description 
• Amount to be reimbursed 
• Must be signed by the employee’s immediate 
supervisor 
 
2. Submit the “Certification Form” attesting “under penalty of 
perjury that amounts stated are correct and were incurred 
in the service of the City of Boston.”   
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-02 
Page 4 of 5 
 
  
3. Submit a completed “Mileage Detail Form” - List the total 
number of miles traveled each day and total-up each page – 
must sign and date each page. 
 
4. Submit all receipts - tolls, parking, ubers/lyfts, MBTA 
individual fares only, etc. 
 
5. Mileage Reimbursement requests “must be” submitted at 
the end of each month or quarterly – 4 times per year, which 
is September 30, December 31, March 31 and the last day of 
school in June. 
 
6. Employee group (union) affiliation must be indicated to 
insure eligibility for reimbursement. 
 
 
 
REMINDER:  You must be registered on the City of Boston 
Vendor/Supplier Portal file in order to be reimbursed.  Go to 
www.boston.gov/procurement   click on "Go to Supplier Portal" 
and follow the instructions.  Wait until you are an approved 
vendor and have acquired your vendor number before 
submitting for reimbursement. 
 
 
If Submitting by Paper: 
● ONLY Submit Single-Sided reimbursements packet – Not 
Double Sided.  Also, no smaller than 12 Font and only on 8x11 
white paper. 
● DO NOT highlight or put scotch tape on receipts because it 
fades the receipts – use staples, only legible receipts will be 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-02 
Page 5 of 5 
 
  
reimbursed – Must submit copies on 8x11 paper of all cash 
register receipts. 
 
 
IMPORTANT REMINDER 
The Fiscal School Year ends on June 30 each year and July 1 starts 
the new Fiscal School Year - You cannot use current school year 
funds to pay for prior school year expenses. 
 
Reimbursements that are not submitted within the School Fiscal 
Year will be in jeopardy of non-payment. 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Unit Leader of Business Services/Accounts 
Payable 
Department: 
Business Services 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston MA.  02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9472 
E-mail: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER:  
FIN-02 
Version 01 
 
 
MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENT 
 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Boston Public School employees who are eligible for mileage 
reimbursement are required by IRS regulation to document 
those costs and provide specific information.  Reimbursement 
cannot be made unless all procedures detailed in this circular are 
followed and all necessary documentation is provided. 
 
All employees who use their own vehicle on authorized school 
business are entitled to be reimbursed as listed below.  Please 
note that travel to and from your home is not eligible for 
reimbursement. 
 
 
All Itinerant Service Providers 
School Psychologists, District Social 
Workers, Speech & Language 
Pathologists, Occupational Therapists, 
Physical Therapists, Adaptive Physical 
Education Teachers, Vision Teachers (ISP 
will receive that $600 payment in 
succeeding years provide the ISP’s direct 
supervisor verifies that the ISP’s travel 
schedule is substantially unchanged) 
 
$600.00 per “full” 
school year (flat 
rate)  
or 
67¢ per mile  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-02b 
Page 2 of 5 
 
  
 
All other BTU members 
 
67¢ per mile  
 
Supervisors of Attendance    
                      
 
67¢ per mile 
 
 
BASAS 
 
 
 
67¢ per mile  
 
Management 
 
 
 
67¢ per mile 
 
 
 
 
Planning & Engineering   
       
 
$15.00 per day (flat 
rate) 
 
 
 
For eligible mileage reimbursement, there must be a sufficient 
appropriation in the respective responsibility center manager’s 
budget (Account 52803 Mileage). 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-02b 
Page 3 of 5 
 
  
 
IMPORTANT! 
Parking fees, tolls, other transportation fares; Lyfts/Ubers, MBTA 
individual fares only (monthly passes are not reimbursable) etc., 
will be reimbursed only when it is clearly stated that the trip 
taken, which resulted in these fees, was for official school 
business and the method of transport was the most economical.  
Original receipts must be produced/provided for reimbursement. 
 
Follow the procedures below to submit for reimbursement 
(Emails accepted): 
 
1. Submit a completed “City of Boston Special Draft/Non Order 
Form” – it must be filled out completely with: 
• School/Department 
• Date 
• Full name of the person being reimbursed 
• Full address of the person being reimbursed 
• Vendor # 
• Full funding source 
• Full “detailed” description 
• Amount to be reimbursed 
• Must be signed by the employee’s immediate 
supervisor 
 
2. Submit the “Certification Form” attesting “under penalty of 
perjury that amounts stated are correct and were incurred 
in the service of the City of Boston.”   
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-02b 
Page 4 of 5 
 
  
3. Submit a completed “Mileage Detail Form” - List the total 
number of miles traveled each day and total-up each page – 
must sign and date each page. 
 
4. Submit all receipts - tolls, parking, ubers/lyfts, MBTA 
individual fares only, etc. 
 
5. Mileage Reimbursement requests “must be” submitted at 
the end of each month or quarterly – 4 times per year, which 
is September 30, December 31, March 31 and the last day of 
school in June. 
 
6. Employee group (union) affiliation must be indicated to 
insure eligibility for reimbursement. 
 
 
 
REMINDER:  You must be registered on the City of Boston 
Vendor/Supplier Portal file in order to be reimbursed.  Go to 
www.boston.gov/procurement   click on "Go to Supplier Portal" 
and follow the instructions.  Wait until you are an approved 
vendor and have acquired your vendor number before 
submitting for reimbursement. 
 
 
If Submitting by Paper: 
● ONLY Submit Single-Sided reimbursements packet – Not 
Double Sided.  Also, no smaller than 12 Font and only on 8x11 
white paper. 
● DO NOT highlight or put scotch tape on receipts because it 
fades the receipts – use staples, only legible receipts will be 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-02b 
Page 5 of 5 
 
  
reimbursed – Must submit copies on 8x11 paper of all cash 
register receipts. 
 
 
IMPORTANT REMINDER 
The Fiscal School Year ends on June 30 each year and July 1 starts 
the new Fiscal School Year. 
 
Reimbursements that are not submitted within the School Fiscal 
Year will be in jeopardy of non-payment. 
 
** You cannot use current school year funds to pay for prior 
school year expenses. ** 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Business Manager 
Department: 
Business Services 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston MA.  02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9472 
E-mail: 
ffinancestaff@bostonpublicschools.organceo.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
FIN-04 
Version 01 
 
 
 
STUDENT ACTIVITY ACCOUNTS:  
OPERATING PROCEDURES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
OVERVIEW 
This Student Activity Accounts: Operating Procedures 
Superintendent’s Circular was put together in accordance with 
Massachusetts General Law Chapter 71 Section 47. The Student 
Activity Account Policy was approved by the School Committee 
in the fall of 2018.  
All students should have an opportunity to take part in co-
curricular activities. As such, Boston Public Schools have 
migrated to a new business process for managing student 
activity accounts. Student activity funds are managed under an 
“Agency Account,” housed under the City’s tax ID number.  
DEFINITION AND CATEGORIES OF STUDENT ACTIVITY 
ACCOUNTS  
Student activity accounts may only be used for the express 
purpose of conducting student activities, which are broadly 
defined to be:  
● Co-curricular in nature.  
● Contingent on a fee or on fundraising.  
● For the sole benefit of students.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 2 of 13 
 
 
Boston Public Schools recognizes the following categories as 
student activities:  
● SOCAL = Socials, such as a dance or pizza party 
● EVENT= Special events, such as a graduation or Science Fair 
● FLDTR = Field trips, such as transportation costs or entrance 
fees 
● CLUBS = School leader-approved student clubs, such as a 
Student Council or Debate Club 
● STORE = Bookstore, only when bookstore is run by students 
and proceeds will benefit students directly 
● ATHLT = Athletics, only when funds are student-driven and 
proceeds will benefit specific student activities directly 
● SNDRY = Miscellaneous activities (this is NOT a catch-all, see 
Student Activity Accounts on the BPS website for approved 
list) 
● BNKFE = Bank fees, such as fees for returned checks 
ESTABLISHING A STUDENT ACTIVITY ACCOUNT 
Student activity funds will be managed utilizing a Student 
Activity Agency Account. The Agency Account is a master 
account maintained by the City’s Collector-Treasurer and is 
utilized to record deposits and expenses. All student activity 
accounts must utilize the City of Boston’s tax ID number and be 
authorized by the BPS chief financial officer and city treasurer.  
Schools seeking to set up a new student activity account within 
the Student Activity Agency Account must contact the BPS 
Finance Office.  
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 3 of 13 
 
When a new school leader begins at a BPS school, they should 
contact the BPS Finance Office. Accounts should be reconciled 
prior to the account changing hands.  
DEPOSIT PROCEDURE 
To deposit funds into your school’s student activity account: 
1. Deposit funds at a Boston Citizens Bank branch using the 
unique deposit slips provided to your school. This is critical to 
ensuring funds are deposited to your school’s subaccount 
and simplifying the reconciliation process. 
a. If depositing funds for use in multiple different student 
activities, schools must use a separate deposit slip for 
each pool of money. 
2. Complete the revenue breakdown form within 2 business 
days of the deposit date to designate the funds to a program 
(SOCAL, EVENT, FLDTR, CLUBS, STORE, ATHLT, SNDRY, 
BNKFE) and class (grade level). This allows the deposited 
funds to be applied to your school’s subaccount and 
reflected in BAIS Financials.  
a. If a deposit is for multiple grades or undefined, utilize 
the “0000” for all grades.  
3. Allow at least 5 business days for the deposit to be booked to 
your school’s subaccount and reflected in BAIS Financials. 
Schools must notify the BPS Finance Office when they are 
running low on unique deposit slips, not when they’ve run out of 
deposit slips, so additional deposit slips may be ordered and 
delivered to the school.  
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 4 of 13 
 
TRANSFER PROCEDURE 
To request a transfer within your school’s student activity 
account:  
1. Submit the transfer request form, which requires a 
justification letter be attached documenting the request.  
Transfer Request Justification Template 
2. Allow at least 5 business days for the transfer to be reflected 
in BAIS Financials.  
EXPENDITURE PROCEDURE 
Standard Purchasing 
To make a purchase out of your school’s student activity account:  
1. Confirm the company/venue is already an approved city 
vendor by looking them up in BAIS Financials or determine if 
the individual needs to be “hired” and paid through the city’s 
payroll system. 
a. If you have a question about whether a 
company/venue is an approved city vendor or should 
be hired, please email 
Vendor.Questions@cityofboston.gov or call 617-635-
4564. 
b. New vendors should register online (see step-by-step 
guidelines for registering online).  
2. After confirming the company/venue is an approved city 
vendor, enter a requisition for student activities using the 
following information:  
Fund Number: 470 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 5 of 13 
 
Account: Should be appropriate to the requisition. An 
example is account 52811 for a field trip. If unsure, review 
the account code list or contact BPS Purchasing.  
Program: An alpha entry matching the revenue breakdown 
of SOCAL, EVENT, FLDTR, CLUBS, STORE, ATHLT, SNDRY, or 
BNKFE. 
Class: An alphanumeric entry matching the revenue 
breakdown of: 0000 (all grades); BPSK0; BPSK1; BPSK2; 
BPS01; BPS02; BPS03; BPS04; BPS05; BPS06; BPS07; BPS08; 
BPS09; BPS10; BPS11; BPS12 
Bud Ref: 0000 
3. Follow the standard purchasing guidelines outlined in the 
Business Services Manual to complete the requisition and 
purchase process.  
Reimbursement 
To request a reimbursement out of your school’s student activity 
account: 
1. Confirm the person is already properly hired or an approved 
city vendor by looking them up in BAIS Financials.  
b. If you have a question about whether a 
company/venue is an approved city vendor or should 
be hired, please email 
Vendor.Questions@cityofboston.gov or call 617-635-
4564. 
c. New vendors should register online (see step-by-step 
guidelines for registering online).  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 6 of 13 
 
2. After confirming the person is an approved city vendor, 
complete and submit a hard copy of the Non Order form 
with details of the expense, funding source, and amount. 
Reimbursement instructions can be found in 
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-03.  
 
Staff seeking reimbursement out of the Student Activity Account 
can receive reimbursement for tax on purchases; however, tax 
can be saved by going through the standard purchasing process.  
Reach out to Lisa Greaves or Bob Cass with any reimbursement 
questions.  
The Business Services Guide may be a helpful resource for further 
inquiries on purchasing. 
CHECKING STUDENT ACTIVITY ACCOUNT BALANCES 
To check your school’s student activity account balance:  
1. Log into BAIS Financials. 
2. From the main menu drop-down options, select 
REPORTING TOOLS. 
3. From Reporting Tools, select QUERY. 
4. Click on QUERY VIEWER. 
5. Next to “Search by,” select QUERY NAME from the drop-
down options. 
6. In the blank next to “begins with,” enter 
Y_GL_QRY_SCH_ACT_BUDGET_BAL. 
7. Select how you'd like to run the report: HTML, Excel, or XML. 
8. In the blank next to “department,” enter your school’s 6-
digit RC code.  
9. Click VIEW RESULTS: 
a. Scroll through all the line items to find balances (there 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 7 of 13 
 
will likely be several rows that show no balance) OR  
b. Download the results and filter out all the rows without 
a balance.  
To check deposits and expenditures in your school’s student 
activity account:  
1. Log into BAIS Financials  
2. From the main menu drop down options, select REPORTING 
TOOLS. 
3. From Reporting Tools, select QUERY. 
4. Click on QUERY VIEWER. 
5. Next to “Search by,” select QUERY NAME from the drop-
down options.  
6. In the blank next to “begins with,” enter 
Y_GL_QRY_EXP_PO_CN_DTL. 
7. Select how you'd like to run the report: HTML, Excel, or XML. 
8. Enter the following for the blanks:  
a. Fund Code: 470 
b. Organization: Your school’s 6-digit RC Code 
c. Program Code: % 
d. Sub-Classification: % 
e. Project/Grant: % 
f. Account: % 
g. Budget Reference: % 
h. From Accounting Period: 1 
i. To Accounting Period: 12 
j. From Fiscal Year: Starting year (for example, if you just 
want to look at this current school year, you’d enter 
2024, but if you wanted to look at the account over 
time, you’d enter 2018). 
k. To Fiscal Year: Ending year. 
9. Click VIEW RESULTS. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 8 of 13 
 
REPORTING 
Monthly Reconciliation Reports 
By the 5th of each month (September - July):  
1. Complete the monthly reconciliation report for the previous 
month, reconciling your school’s PeopleSoft balance with 
submitted revenue breakdown forms and expenditure 
requests. 
2. Completed monthly reconciliations should be sent to school 
leader, all student organization leadership (and/or parent 
council leadership if elementary school), and Charlie Ng by 
the 5th of each month for the previous month (example: for 
the February reconciliation, submit by March 5). PDFs should 
be uploaded to your school’s SAA reporting folder and saved 
for 7 years.  
Year End Reconciliation 
By June 21:  
1. Complete Form B for each additional bank account 
associated with the school (Form B doesn’t need to be 
completed for the student activity and before/after school 
accounts) and record every transaction for each account. 
Additional bank accounts include 501c3, BEDF, Parent 
Council, and Sunshine Fund accounts.  
2. A final monthly reconciliation report should be submitted by 
July 5 to close out the student activity account for the school 
year 
3. Completed forms should be sent to Charlie Ng.  


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 9 of 13 
 
CASH POLICY AND RECORD-KEEPING 
Internal Records And Ledgers 
Schools must keep detailed records of their receipts and 
expenses for the account. Records should contain, at minimum, 
the level of detail provided in the example ledger by line. The 
specific purpose/activity of all money should be tracked. It is 
recommended that for individual activities, such as a specific 
field trip or event, schools also track all receipts and expenses (i.e., 
all revenue and expenses for prom). A copy of these records 
should be housed in your school’s SAA folder. The purpose of 
these records is to:  
● Ensure bank deposits match the total receipts of fees and 
fund-raised money. 
● Ensure entirety of the money is spent on the intended 
purpose, benefiting solely the students who the money was 
raised for/by. 
● Avoid large surpluses and deficit spending. 
Cash Policy 
Cash boxes may be used to receive cash and checks and make 
change during fundraising activities.  
As needed, the cash box may be signed out to staff and student 
organizations as long as a cash box log is completed each time 
the cash box is signed out.  
Schools need to keep records of collected cash and checks. When 
$10 or more is collected from an individual, a pre-printed carbon 
receipt must be issued to that individual. Carbon copies of 
receipts should be submitted to the school leader along with 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 10 of 13 
 
collected cash and checks WITHIN 24 HOURS of receipt. In cases 
of a large number of transactions in a short period of time, the 
receipt log should be used to provide a record of individual 
transactions and be submitted to the school leader along with 
collected cash and checks WITHIN 24 HOURS of receipt. 
When less than $10 is collected from an individual, a pre-printed 
carbon receipt does not need to be issued. Rather, the person 
handling the cash box needs to record the collected funds on the 
receipt log. The receipt log should be submitted to the school 
leader along with collected cash / checks WITHIN 24 HOURS of 
receipt.  
The cash box must be reconciled daily by two individuals. Once 
the cash is counted, each individual should initial the cash box 
reconciliation form. 
Collected cash / checks totaling under $1,500 must be deposited 
at a Boston Citizens Bank branch WITHIN A WEEK of receipt. 
Total collected cash / checks exceeding $1,500 must be deposited 
at a Boston Citizens Bank branch WITHIN 72 HOURS of receipt.  
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 11 of 13 
 
CLOSURE OF ACCOUNTS 
Closure of Class Accounts at Graduation 
The following procedures should be followed with respect to 
class accounts at graduation:  
1. Keep class accounts open and active for 90 days after 
graduation to allow for outstanding bills to be received and 
paid.  
2. After 90 days, remaining funds must either be: 
a. Transferred to a separate account established by class 
members, not using the city’s tax ID number. 
b. Transferred to the school’s SNDRY, 0000 (all grades) 
line. 
Closure of Inactive Accounts  
The following procedures should be followed with respect to 
inactive and undesignated accounts at the district level:  
1. Accounts will be closed, and remaining balances will be 
transferred to the Student Activity Agency Account. 
2. Remaining balances will be distributed across all schools’ 
SNDRY, 0000 (all grades) lines. 
The following procedures should be followed with respect to 
inactive accounts at the school level:  
1. Provide written notification about the inactive account to 
the BPS Finance Office.  
2. If the account should be closed out and has a balance of 
funds:  
a. The balance of recognized student activity funds 
should be moved into the appropriate program and 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 12 of 13 
 
class subaccounts. 
b. The balance of unrecognized student activity funds 
should be moved into the school’s SNDRY, 0000 (all 
grades) line. 
RESOURCES 
For additional information and resources on Student Activity 
Accounts:  
● Student Activity Account: Policies & Procedures Manual 
Student Activity Account Website  
● SAA Slide Deck 
● 7-minute Overview Presentation 
● Purchasing Manual  
● Massachusetts General Law 
Please contact the Finance Office if you have any student activity 
account questions not addressed in this circular. 
Questions related to deposits, fund balances, and account status 
should be directed to: 
Special Accounts Manager, finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
Internal Controls Project Manager, finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 13 of 13 
 
Questions related to purchases from this account should be 
directed to:  
Assistant Business Manager, finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org / 617-635-6758  
Questions related to reimbursements from this account should 
be directed to: 
Principal Account Clerk finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org / 
617-635-9472 
 
Unit Leader of Business Services/Accounts Payable  
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org / 617-635-9469 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FIN-16 
Version 01 
 
 
 
BUDGET TRANSFERS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Please use the online reference document Budget Transfers as 
your guide to initiating online budget transfer requests.   
 
INTRODUCTION 
Each year, departments review their budgets and allocate money 
for various goods and services for the next fiscal year. Funds are 
allocated to budget lines reflective of their intended use. As 
needs change, departments often want to reallocate money 
between budget lines. This can be accomplished through a 
budget transfer. Budget transfers are the mechanism by which 
available budgeted resources are moved from one budget line 
item to another in the Boston Public Schools financial system 
(PeopleSoft). 
All budget transfer requests are entered directly into the 
PeopleSoft financial system by authorized users (principals, 
heads of school, responsibility center managers, or their 
designees). The Budget Office no longer accepts paper transfer 
forms. A detailed “job aid” follows on how an online budget 
transfer request is initiated.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-16 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
 
The on-line budget transfer request process involves 6 basic 
components:  
1) Navigate to the transfer “form” (budget journal) in 
PeopleSoft. 
2) Enter data (explanation, budget codes, dollars, and/or FTEs).  
3) Complete a budget error check.  
4) Save the completed transfer.  
5) Send to the Budget Office for approval.  
6) Track the progress of your transfer online. 
INCREMENTAL APPROACH 
Budget transfers employ an “incremental” approach, meaning 
that if dollars are being moved from a particular line item, a 
negative dollar value will be associated with that line item. 
Conversely, if resources are being moved to a line item, the dollar 
value in the amount column will be a positive figure. Budget 
transfers must sum to $0. For example, if a principal wished to 
move $3,000.00 from a contracts line item to a stipends line item, 
the transfer lines might look like this: 
Account 
Fund 
RC 
Program 
Subclass 
Amount 
52907 
Contracted 
Services  
100 
General 
Fund     
101203 
Adams 
School  
2112  
Elem Ed.       
 
 
0000 
- 
$3,000.00 
51202 Prof. 
OT/ Stipends 
100 
General 
Fund     
101203 
Adams 
School 
2014  
Grade 4      
 
 
0000   
$3,000.00     
 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-16 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
 
Budget transfers involving additions, deletions, or changes to full-
time equivalent (FTE) positions also follow an incremental 
approach. Therefore, a negative FTE would be associated with the 
reduction or deletion of a position, and a positive FTE with the 
creation or increase of a position. For example, if I wished to 
reduce a position from a 0.8 FTE to a 0.6 FTE, I would type -0.2 in 
the FTE column (“statistic amount” in the budget journal) for that 
budget line. If I wished to delete that position entirely, I would 
have put -0.8 in the FTE column. If I had wished to increase the 
position to 1.0 FTE, I would have typed 0.2 in the FTE column. 
Whenever a budget transfer involves a position, the position 
number should be identified in the “reference” field in the 
budget transfer. If requesting a new position, leave the reference 
field blank, to be filled in by the Budget Office when the new 
position is created.   
REQUIREMENTS & RESTRICTIONS 
1. The authorizer requesting the transfer must have BAIS FN 
access.  
2. No Responsibility Center will be allowed to transfer funds 
arising from staff vacancies.  These “lag funds” make up the 
Boston Public Schools contingency fund and will be 
reallocated at the sole discretion of the superintendent.  
Exceptions to this policy will only be made upon written 
request and written approval by the chief financial officer. 
3. Funds should not be transferred out of personnel accounts 
(starting with 51__) or substitute accounts. Under normal 
circumstances, adjustments to budget line items associated 
with positions will be rare and must be explicitly approved 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-16 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
 
by the Office of Human Capital prior to the budget transfer 
request being approved. 
4. Budget transfer requests that lack sufficient explanatory 
detail in the “Long Description” text box on the budget 
journal header will not be approved. 
5. In concert with the annual requisition deadline, budget 
transfers for any fiscal year will not be processed after the 
April requisition deadline of that fiscal year.  The only 
exception to this policy may be transfers for grants which 
extend beyond June 30.  
6. Transfer requests which exceed the “available amount” left 
in a particular line will not be processed (in other words, you 
cannot transfer funds which you have already spent!). 
7. Line-item budget transfers can only take place within a 
funding source (i.e., General Fund to General Fund or Title 1 
to Title 1), but not between the General Fund and a grant, 
nor between two separate grants. 
8. Title I EL funds (programs that begin with 24__) cannot be 
transferred to another program, as this funding can only be 
used for ELLs. Likewise, partnership funds (program 2536), 
and parent support services funds (Fund 200 program 2515) 
should not be moved to another program. Homeless 
services funds (program 2533) should be kept in the same 
code where possible but are not fully restricted. 
9. Authority to request budget transfers is reserved to 
principals, heads of school, and RC managers, unless and 
until they explicitly delegate that authority to a designee in 
writing to the chief financial officer or the budget director. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-16 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
 
10. While the on-line budget transfer protocol has made the 
execution of budget transfers simple and efficient, there is 
no substitute for thoughtful, forward-looking resource 
planning.  The Budget Office is glad to assist with such 
planning. 
 
PLEASE USE THE ONLINE REFERENCE DOCUMENT BUDGET 
TRANSFERS AS YOUR GUIDE TO INITIATING ONLINE BUDGET 
TRANSFER REQUESTS.   
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Budget Director 
Department: 
Budget Office 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street. Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-6772 
E-mail: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
  
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
SHS-05 
Version 01 
 
 
 
TUBERCULOSIS PROGRAM 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
POLICY ON TUBERCULOSIS TESTING 
All students must have an assessment of tuberculosis risk. Staff 
are no longer required to show evidence of TB skin test screening 
at time of employment. 
PROTOCOL FOR TUBERCULOSIS PROGRAM 
Students: 
● At the time of registration for entry into the Boston Public 
Schools, if parents present with information on TB 
screening, the data will be entered along with the 
immunization data into the student(s) electronic health 
record. 
● No child will have school registration delayed because of 
lack of tuberculosis screening documentation. 
● It is the responsibility of the primary care health provider, 
and NOT the school system, to ensure that appropriate 
screening for tuberculosis is occurring in the community. 
● The school nurse may choose to check a child’s PPD 
(Mantoux) or monitor preventive therapy at the request of 
the primary care provider. The primary care provider must 
submit a written physician order to the school nurse for 
services.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-05 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
● Written documentation of an in-school PPD test result or 
the monitoring of preventive therapy will be provided to the 
primary care provider by the school nurse. 
● Students with active disease will be excluded from school 
until placed on treatment and written documentation by 
BPHC TB Control of non-contiguous state is presented. 
Staff: 
● Staff are no longer required to have TB screening as 
candidates for hiring. The regulation of Communicable 
Tuberculosis Periodic Examination of School Personnel has 
been repealed in the Massachusetts General Laws.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SHS-26 
Version 01 
 
 
 
ADMINISTRATION OF NALOXONE 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
To recognize and respond to potential life-threatening opioid 
overdose as part of the MDPH opioid overdose prevention 
program, the Boston Public Schools will maintain a systemwide 
plan for addressing a potentially life-threatening opioid overdose 
reaction.  
Additionally:   
• This plan will be supplemented by any building-based 
medical emergency response plan.  
• The director of Health Services will have the responsibility 
for the development and management of the intranasal 
Naloxone administration program in the school setting in 
accordance with MDPH protocols.   
• The school physician will provide oversight to monitor the 
program and creation of the standing order for the district, 
to be renewed annually.   
• Training per MDPH protocols will be provided for all school 
nurse responders.  
Naloxone is the only Schedule IV controlled substance in 
Massachusetts that can be prescribed to someone other than the 
ultimate user. The Massachusetts Controlled Substances Act, 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-26 
Page 2 of 9 
 
 
 
M.G.L. c.94C,§19(b), authorizes naloxone to be prescribed or 
dispensed to a person for use on someone else. It is the policy of 
the Boston Public Schools that all schools shall provide and 
maintain naloxone on-site in each school facility.  To treat a case 
of suspected opioid overdose in a school setting, any school 
nurse may administer naloxone during an emergency to any 
student, staff, or visitor suspected of having an opioid-related 
drug overdose, whether or not there is a previous history of 
opioid abuse, per 105 CMR 210.000, The Administration of 
Prescription Medications in Public and Private Schools.  
Because naloxone is treated differently than any other 
prescription medication, and because any person can possess 
and administer naloxone, pursuant to the standing order, it is the 
policy of the Massachusetts Department of Public Health School 
Health Unit that individual possession and use of naloxone is not 
covered by 105 CMR 210.000. This means that pursuant to M.G.L. 
c.94c,§19(g) any staff member of the Boston Public Schools who, 
in good faith, attempts to render emergency care by 
administering naloxone to a person reasonably believed to be 
experiencing an opiate related overdose, shall not be liable from 
the attempt to render emergency care and may carry and 
administer naloxone on school property and school events, as 
permitted within M.G.L. c. 94C, §§ 19(d) and 34A9e). This immunity 
does not apply to acts or omissions constituting gross 
negligence. 
BACKGROUND  
Recognizing that fatal and non-fatal overdoses from opioids play 
an increasing role in the mortality and morbidity of 
Massachusetts residents, the Massachusetts Department of 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-26 
Page 3 of 9 
 
 
 
Public Health launched the Overdose Education and Naloxone 
Distribution (OEND) prevention program using intranasal 
Naloxone in an attempt to reverse this trend. Naloxone is an 
opioid antagonist which means it displaces the opioid from 
receptors in the brain. An overdose occurs because the opioid is 
on the same receptor site in the brain that is responsible for 
breathing. Rapid administration of naloxone may be lifesaving in 
patients with an overdose due to opioids. Naloxone usually acts 
dramatically, allowing slowed or absent breathing to resume. It is 
both safe and effective and has no potential for abuse. Naloxone 
has been used by paramedics in ambulances and by emergency 
room clinicians for decades.  
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS OF OPIOID OVERDOSE  
School nurses may administer naloxone to a patient (student, 
staff member or visitor) in the event of respiratory depression, 
unresponsiveness, or respiratory arrest, when an opioid overdose 
is suspected.  
The following are signs of an opioid overdose:   
• Blue skin tinge-usually lips and fingertips show first.   
• Body is very limp.   
• Face is very pale.   
• Pulse is slow, erratic, or not present.   
• Vomiting.   
• Choking sounds, gurgling, snoring/gasping noise.   
• Breathing is very slow, irregular or has stopped.  
• Unresponsive.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-26 
Page 4 of 9 
 
 
 
ROLE OF SCHOOL HEALTH SERVICES 
• Develops policy for administration of naloxone and presents 
to BPS School Committee for approval; reviews policy 
annually. 
• Provides annual education and training for school nurses by 
approved MDPH organizations. 
• Secures and distributes naloxone kits to each school/school 
nurse. 
• Determines proper disposal of used +/or expired naloxone.  
ROLE OF SCHOOL LEADER 
• Supports and facilitates access to school nurse training on 
administration of naloxone. 
• Supports substance abuse prevention education as part of a 
comprehensive health education program. 
• The school leader and staff should be alert to those 
symptoms in students which may indicate problems with 
substance abuse so that they may initiate assistance to 
students in need of early intervention. 
ROLE OF SCHOOL NURSE 
• Participates in a training program offered by Health 
Services. 
• Provides safe storage and easy access to naloxone. 
• Is alert to symptoms in students which may indicate 
problems with substance abuse in order to initiate 
assistance to students in need of early intervention.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-26 
Page 5 of 9 
 
 
 
• Refers the student to the Student Support Team if the 
student is struggling with substance use. 
• Administers naloxone following the procedure as listed 
below in the event of respiratory depression, 
unresponsiveness, or respiratory arrest, when an opioid 
overdose is suspected and activate EMS. 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Activate EMS via Medical Emergency Response Plan. The 
nurse or designee must call 911 in all potential overdose 
situations.  
2. Assessment:  ABC’s: Airway, Breathing, Circulation. When 
an individual is suspected of an opioid overdose, the nurse 
will conduct an initial assessment of the level of 
consciousness and respiratory status.  
a. For individuals with no pulse: initiate CPR per BLS 
guidelines.  
b. For individuals with a pulse but who are not breathing: 
establish an airway and perform rescue breathing 
using a face mask or shield. 
c. Check for: foreign body in airway, level of 
consciousness or unresponsiveness, very low 
respiratory rate or not breathing, no response to sternal 
rub, respiratory status, gasping for air while asleep or 
odd snoring pattern, pale or bluish skin, slow heart rate, 
low blood pressure. Pinpoint pupils and track marks 
may be present, although absence of these findings 
does not exclude opioid overdose.  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-26 
Page 6 of 9 
 
 
 
d. For individuals who have a pulse and are breathing: 
assess if there is depression of the respiratory status as 
evidenced by:   
i. a very low respiration rate.   
ii. interpretation of pulse oximetry measurement, if 
immediately available. 
e. Assess for decrease in level of consciousness as 
evidenced by:   
i. difficult to arouse (responds to physical stimuli 
but does not communicate or follow commands; 
may move spontaneously) or   
ii. unable to arouse (minimal or no response to 
noxious stimuli, does not communicate or follow 
commands). 
f. Nurse determines need for naloxone administration.  
3. Administration: Intranasal administration of naloxone  
a. Assess person for contraindications or precaution, per 
available information. 
b. How to use naloxone nasal spray:  
i. Follow manufacturer’s instructions for proper 
administration. 
ii. Step 1. Lay the person on their back to receive a 
dose of naloxone nasal spray.  
iii. Step 2. Remove naloxone nasal spray from the 
box. Peel back the tab with the circle to open the 
naloxone nasal spray. 
iv. Step 3. Hold the naloxone nasal spray with your 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-26 
Page 7 of 9 
 
 
 
thumb on the bottom of the red plunger and your 
first and middle fingers on either side of the 
nozzle.  
v. Step 4. Tilt the person’s head back and provide 
support under the neck with your hand. Gently 
insert the tip of the nozzle into one nostril until 
your fingers on either side of the nozzle are 
against the bottom of the person’s nose.  
vi. Step 5. Press the red plunger firmly to give the 
dose of naloxone nasal spray. 
vii. Step 6. Remove the naloxone nasal spray from the 
nostril after giving the dose.  
viii. If the person does not respond in 3 mins, repeat 
the steps and give the second dose of naloxone 
nasal spray in a box. 
ix. Monitor until EMS arrives.   
x. Place the victim in the recovery position and stay 
with the victim.  
4. Monitor the individual: Naloxone blocks the opioid from 
acting so it can cause withdrawal symptoms with opioid 
tolerance. 
a. Remain with the victim until emergency support 
arrives; The victim may breathe but not have full 
arousal OR They may require continued rescue 
breathing and support. 
Following the incident, debrief with the school team and health 
services. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-26 
Page 8 of 9 
 
 
 
Documentation:  
1. Record the encounter in SNAP. 
2. Complete an Incident report. 
3. Complete a “911” report. 
4. Include the individual’s presentation, route of 
administration of naloxone, and dose administered. Also 
include the individual’s response to the naloxone 
administration. 
Storage: Store at 59° to 86°, away from direct sunlight 
Disposal: Empty, administered naloxone nasal spray should 
be returned to the original packaging and disposed of in a 
waste receptacle. 
REFERENCES 
• BPS SHS-01 Drug and Alcohol Abuse – Update On 
Procedures 
• BPS SHS-08 Medication Administration 
• NASN Naloxone Toolkit for School Nurses 
• MDPH Bureau of Substance Addiction Services 
 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-26 
Page 9 of 9 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SHS-16 
Version 01 
 
 
 
SUICIDE PREVENTION AND INTERVENTION 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
POLICY STATEMENT 
It is the policy of the Boston Public Schools (BPS) to provide an 
array of services for students through the utilization of internal 
and external support resources to promote their social and 
emotional growth and well-being. In those cases where 
individual students are at-risk or in-crisis, all staff will collaborate 
in providing those supports needed to ensure the student’s 
safety and well-being. When there is an acute crisis within the 
school community, staff will collaborate, under the direction of 
the building administrator and with support from the Behavioral 
Health Services District Crisis Team (as needed/appropriate), in 
addressing those problems and issues raised by that death 
among students, staff, and parents. 
POLICY GUIDELINES 
The following policy guidelines have been established to address 
the issue of suicide prevention and intervention and will be 
followed in all schools: 
1. All staff should be aware of suicide distress signals and 
symptoms outlined herein. 
2. All staff have an obligation to be knowledgeable about and 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 2 of 18 
 
 
 
to cooperate fully in the implementation of the BPS Suicide 
Prevention and Intervention Policy Statement and Policy 
Guidelines. 
3. Building administrators will provide leadership in 
addressing the issue of suicide prevention and intervention 
and will establish and maintain the following support 
mechanisms required to address the issue within the wider 
school community: 
a. Implement prevention and intervention strategies 
according to a multi-tiered system of support (MTSS) 
framework.  
b. Be sure that staff is knowledgeable about the purpose 
of the Student Success Team (SST), its membership, 
and the process for making referrals to the team. 
c. Ensure the provision of in-service training for staff in 
the fall of each school year concerning the issues of 
suicide/crisis intervention and prevention, including 
suicide risk assessment procedures. 
d. Establish and maintain linkages with appropriate 
community-based support agencies that will assist the 
school in addressing this issue. 
e. Provide information and services to students with a 
view to implementing fully the letter and spirit of the 
Boston Public Schools Suicide Prevention and 
Intervention Policy. 
Finally, it is paramount to highlight that racism undermines 
mental health. Therefore, BPS is committed to culturally and 
linguistically sustaining practices (CLSP) in all that is done in 
supporting students and families. This means that we pledge to 
work against individual racism, interpersonal racism, and 
institutional racism in all their forms by creating systems that 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 3 of 18 
 
 
 
work for our students and families. It is also well understood that 
there is an increased risk of suicide amongst traditionally 
marginalized groups, particularly in LGBTQ+ students.  
KEY TERMS 
It is essential that all Boston Public Schools staff understand the 
following terms. 
Suicide: Death caused by self-directed injurious behavior with 
intent to die as a result of the behavior. 
Suicide Attempt: A non-fatal, self-directed, potentially injurious 
behavior with at least some intent to die as a result of the 
behavior. 
Suicidal Ideation: Thinking about, considering, or planning 
suicide1. 
Self-Injury:  The act of deliberately harming one’s own body, 
such as cutting or burning, as a way to cope with emotional 
pain2.  
TIERED PREVENTION & INTERVENTION STRATEGIES 
It should be the goal of the school community to work together, 
under the leadership of the building administrator, to establish 
and maintain a program of suicide prevention. Schools are 
important settings for suicide prevention for the following 
reasons: school personnel interact regularly with students and 
play an important role in keeping students safe; suicide has a 
 
1 NIMH » Home  
2 Self-injury/cutting - Symptoms and causes 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 4 of 18 
 
 
 
negative impact on an entire school community; and creating 
and maintaining a safe and supportive learning environment is 
part of the mission of BPS3. Prevention efforts should follow an 
MTSS continuum, with low-intensity prevention efforts for all 
students and more intensive prevention efforts for those with 
higher risk. The following prevention and intervention strategies 
are strongly recommended as part of a school-based suicide 
prevention approach. 
 Tier 1 Prevention 
School Climate 
and Culture 
Building a safe and supportive school 
climate is a vital step in suicide prevention. 
Schools should consider how they are 
teaching kids to ask for help and how they 
are creating safe spaces for relationship-
building.   
School-Wide 
Psychoeducation 
Break Free From Depression (grades 9-12) 
Signs of Suicide (grades 6-12) 
Social Emotional Learning curriculum 
(grades pre-K to 12) 
 
3 Schools 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 5 of 18 
 
 
 
Universal 
Behavioral Health 
Screening 
Using a universal behavioral health 
screening tool (e.g. BIMAS-2) at least twice 
per year helps schools assess students’ 
level of risk and identify appropriate 
prevention strategies. 
The Trevor Project — Saving Young LGBTQ 
Lives 
Samaritans 24-hour Hotline 
Samaritans IM Here Online Chat Program 
Knowing Risk 
Factors & Warning 
Signs 
Ensure that all staff are familiar with 
suicide symptoms and report student 
concerns to the building administrator in a 
timely fashion. (See page 9-10 for a list of 
warning signs along with common risk and 
protective factors.) 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 6 of 18 
 
 
 
 Tier 2 Prevention & Intervention Strategies 
Structures and protocols to address and provide support to 
students presenting at risk. 
Person(s) 
Responsible 
Response Protocol 
Student Success 
Team (SST) 
The SST should provide a systematic 
process for identifying and addressing the 
needs of students in need of support 
services and emphasize suicide prevention 
strategies. This can consist of guardian 
contact regarding concerns, referral to a 
partner or other agency for provision of 
services, such as group counseling, etc. 
 
 Tier 3 Intervention Strategies  
All school staff should be familiar with intervention strategies and 
protocols and be trained once per year. Different levels of 
intervention (suicide risk assessment, safety planning, 
emergency response, and postvention) are required, depending 
on the nature and seriousness of the situation. 
1. Student has made suicidal gestures or statements. 
The BPS Suicide Risk Assessment (SRA) should be initiated 
immediately if there is concern that a student has thoughts 
about suicide. The SRA will guide the process for (1) gathering 
information about the concern, (2) developing an appropriate 
intervention plan, and (3) documenting both. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 7 of 18 
 
 
 
Person 
Responsible 
Response Protocol 
Staff Person on 
Scene 
1. Keep the student safe.  
a. Supervise the student by ensuring 
they are in the presence of a staff 
member. 
b. Call 911 if there is a concern about 
imminent danger. The BEST team 
and / or a safety check may be 
appropriate. 
2. Notify the school administrator. 
3. Report the situation to the designated 
school leader(s). 
Head of 
School/Principal 
or Designee 
1. Continue the support initiated by the 
staff person. 
2. Contact the parent/guardian and request 
their immediate presence. 
3. Consult with the appropriate members of 
the school’s student success team (SST), 
such as the nurse, school psychologist, 
social worker, student support 
coordinator, etc. 
4. Identify the professionals completing the 
SRA. The SRA must be conducted: 
a. In the student’s preferred language  
b. By at least TWO people, one of 
which must be a BPS employed 
professional and a licensed mental 
health professional. If these 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 8 of 18 
 
 
 
individuals are not available at the 
school, please call the Office of 
Social Work at 617-971-8292. 
5. Use of the Boston Emergency Services 
Team (BEST) should be considered (1-800-
981-4357). The parent/guardian may also 
opt to take the student to a nearby BEST 
community clinic. 
6. Submit reports as required. 
BPS employed 
professional and 
a licensed mental 
health 
professional 
1. Complete the BPS Suicide Risk 
Assessment and determine the level of 
risk. 
2. Work with the student to create a 
Student Safety Plan 
3. Identify appropriate supportive services 
and list them in the intervention plan at 
the end of the SRA document. 
a. Possible High-Risk Interventions:  
i. 
Guardian takes their student for 
immediate intervention with a 
health care provider.  
ii. 
Guardian and/or school to 
contact BEST team at 1-800-
981-4357. 
iii. 
Contact BPS School Police at 
617-635-8000. 
iv. 
Call 911 if necessary. 
b. Possible Low Risk Interventions: 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 9 of 18 
 
 
 
i. 
Guardian to speak with the 
student about this incident or 
concern. 
ii. 
Teacher to monitor student’s 
behavior and report any 
changes or concerns. 
iii. 
Referral to outside agencies 
for support 
iv. 
Referral to Student Success 
Team or other school-based 
supports 
4. Scan and upload a copy of the completed 
intervention plan and signature page, 
along with the student safety plan to 
Aspen. Retain SRA interview pages in a 
clinical file in an agreed upon location in 
your school. 
5. Share the Student Safety Plan with 
parents/caregivers and all appropriate 
school-based personnel and community-
based partners. 
6. Create a re-entry plan for students when 
they return to school.    
 
 
 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 10 of 18 
 
 
 
Parent / Family 
Collaboration 
Notify the Student’s Legal Guardian(s) or 
Emergency Contact(s). These may include: 
 Legal Guardian(s) listed in ASPEN.  
 Emergency Contact(s) listed in ASPEN.  
 Legal Guardian(s) has been asked to 
come to school to discuss the student’s 
needs. 
 Record if the Legal Guardian(s) have 
NOT been notified and why they have 
not been notified. 
 Share the SRA interview and plan for 
any interventions and collaborate 
around follow-up. 
 
2. Suicide Attempt Has Occurred 
Person 
Responsible 
Response Protocol 
Staff Person on 
Scene 
1. Initiate first aid, if appropriate. 
2. Contact the head of school/principal or 
designee (e.g., nurse, social worker, 
school psychologist). 
3. Contact the school nurse. 
4. Do not leave the person alone. 
5. Remove anything that may enable the 
person to hurt themself. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 11 of 18 
 
 
 
School Nurse 
1. Initiate required medical procedures. 
2. Accompany (or ensure that a staff 
member accompanies) the student to 
the hospital. 
3. Remain with the student until the 
parent / caregiver arrives or for as long 
as possible. 
4. Inform the building administrator of the 
student’s condition. This includes 
informing the administrator when the 
staff member is leaving the hospital. 
Head of 
School/Principal 
or Designee 
1. Initiate the procedures in 
Superintendent’s Circular, FSE-05 
Medical Emergency Management 
2. Contact the legal guardian and inform 
them of the situation and the hospital to 
which the student is being taken, if 
applicable. 
3. Accompany the student to the hospital, 
if applicable 
4. Contact the Superintendent’s Office 
(617-635-9055) to report the incident. 
5. Complete required reports. 
 
 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 12 of 18 
 
 
 
3. Postvention 
Structures and protocols to address school need after a 
completed suicide.  
Postvention should be tailored to a specific situation, handled 
case by case by your school's mental health staff and the crisis 
team. Call your assigned District Social Worker or the Director of 
Social Work, Jenna Parafincczuk at 617-971-8292 
Person Responsible 
Response Protocol 
Head of 
school/Principal or 
Designee 
Call and notify your assigned District 
Social Worker for assistance in 
planning and carrying out Postvention 
steps for ensuring safety and 
addressing the psychological needs of 
students and staff. 
RELEASING STUDENTS TO PARENT/CAREGIVER 
The head of school/principal or designee should release the 
student to the parent after: 
• Providing the parent/caregiver with the name of a medical 
person, a mental health worker, or a resource agency 
• Urging the parent to immediately bring the student to that 
person or agency 
• Urging the parent to provide the school with any follow-up 
information that may be forthcoming from medical or 
mental health personnel in order for the school to better 
provide for the student 
If a parent/caregiver or emergency contact cannot be contacted 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 13 of 18 
 
 
 
after two hours, Department of Children and Families should be 
contacted at the hot line (1-800-792-5200) and/or emergency 
medical procedures should be implemented. Under no 
circumstances should a child be allowed to go home without a 
parent/guardian. The student should be kept at the school until a 
DCF worker arrives. In these cases, schools should initiate the 
procedures in Supertintendent’s Circular SUP-20, Child Abuse 
and Neglect Procedures. 
REFERRAL TO EXTERNAL SUPPORT AGENCIES 
It is recommended that all students, both those “in-crisis” and 
those who have exhibited or expressed any symptoms of suicide, 
be referred for support by external agencies with staff trained 
and experienced in providing suicide intervention. 
RETURNING TO SCHOOL 
All students returning to school after a period of absence are 
required to bring notes of explanation/excuse for the absence, 
signed by the parent/guardian. For students returning to school 
after emergency treatment for suicide intervention, schools 
should make all reasonable efforts to obtain documentation from 
a medical/mental health provider indicating that the student is 
able and safe to return to school. Failure of the school to receive 
such documentation, however, will not be grounds for excluding 
the student from school. Those students unable to return for 
medical or mental health reasons after a crisis situation may 
qualify for services under the provisions of Superintendent’s 
Circular SSS-19 Home and Hospital Instruction. 
All returning students should report first to the school nurse (or 
other trained student support staff, such as the school 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 14 of 18 
 
 
 
psychologist or social worker), who will take the following 
actions: 
1. Review and file the letter from the medical/mental health 
provider as part of a confidential health record. 
2. Accompany the student to the homeroom for re-admission. 
Every effort should be made to do this with sensitivity and to 
maintain as great a degree of confidentiality as possible. 
3. Inform the head of school/principal of the student’s return. 
4. Bring the case to the school’s SST for review and assignment 
of an internal liaison person. 
This liaison person will monitor the student’s re-entry and serve 
as the person to whom staff should report recurring warning 
signs. The liaison might be a homeroom or subject area teacher, 
a school psychologist, a guidance counselor, the nurse, or other 
member of the faculty who is trusted by the student. The liaison 
might also serve as the link with the parent/guardian concerning 
the student’s status and, with written permission of the 
parent/guardian, serve as a liaison with any external agency staff 
providing special support to the student. 
 
 
 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 15 of 18 
 
 
 
APPENDEUM: 
SUICIDE WARNING SIGNS 
Warning signs are indicators that a student may be in danger of 
committing suicide and may need urgent help. 
Verbal 
Behavioral 
• Talking about and/or 
making suicide plans 
• Talking about and/or 
gathering suicide 
methods/information 
• Statements that family 
and friends would not 
miss them 
• Expressions of 
hopelessness and/or 
anger at self and the 
world 
• Talking about seeking 
revenge 
• Talking about feeling 
trapped or being in 
unbearable pain 
• Talking about being a 
burden to others 
 
• Looking for a way to kill 
oneself 
• Increasing the use of 
alcohol or drugs 
• Acting anxious, agitated, 
or restless 
• Sleeping too little or too 
much 
• Withdrawing or feeling 
isolated 
• Scratching, cutting, 
marking body, or other 
self-injurious behaviors 
• Writing of suicidal notes 
or posting on social media 
• Making final 
arrangements 
• Giving away prized 
possessions 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 16 of 18 
 
 
 
• Reading, writing, and/or 
art about death 
• Sudden positive behavior 
change following a period 
of depression 
ENVIRONMENTAL WARNING SIGNS 
• Recent loss through death 
• Recent loss through suicide 
• Anniversary of a significant loss 
• Recent experiences of violence 
• Justice system involvement 
• Anniversary of a significant loss 
 
 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 17 of 18 
 
 
 
SUICIDE RISK FACTORS 
Risk factors are characteristics that make it more likely a student 
might consider, attempt, or die by suicide. 
Individual 
Environmental 
• LGBTQ+ Identity 
• Substance Abuse 
• Medication use 
• History of mental disorders, 
particularly clinical depression 
(that has not been dx or 
treated properly) 
• Prior suicide attempts 
• Hopelessness / A Burden 
• Hallucinations 
• Delusions 
• Impulsive or aggressive 
tendencies 
• Cultural and religious beliefs 
(e.g., belief that suicide is noble 
resolution of a personal 
dilemma) 
• Physical Illness 
• Unwillingness to seek help 
because of the stigma 
attached to mental health and 
substance abuse disorders or 
to suicidal thoughts 
• Interpersonal conflict 
• Isolation / aloneness 
• Parent suicide 
attempts / family 
history 
• Early loss / 
separation from 
family 
• Cultural sanctions for 
suicide 
• Loss (relational, 
social, work or 
financial) 
• Local epidemics of 
suicide 
• Barriers to accessing 
mental health 
treatment 
• Easy to access lethal 
methods 
 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-16 
Page 18 of 18 
 
 
 
SUICIDE PROTECTIVE FACTORS 
Protective factors are characteristics that make it less likely that a 
student will engage in suicidal behavior. 
• Effective clinical care for mental, physical, and substance 
abuse disorders 
• Easy access to a variety of clinical interventions and support 
for help seeking 
• Family and community support (connectedness) 
• Support from ongoing medical and mental health care 
relationships 
• Skills in problem solving, conflict resolution, and nonviolent 
ways of handling disputes 
• Cultural and religious beliefs that discourage suicide and 
support instincts for self-preservation 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Social Work, Division of Student 
Support 
Department: 
Social Work 
Mailing Address: 
205 Roxbury Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-971-8292 
E-mail: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
SHS-24 
Version 01 
 
DIAPERING AND TOILETING ACCIDENTS POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
BACKGROUND  
Toilet training typically occurs between 18 months and 3½ years 
of a child’s developmental stage.  
Individuals with disabilities may face more significant obstacles 
with toilet training than persons without diagnosed disabilities. 
This may be partly due to the individual’s challenges with 
communication, medicines, social interaction, sensory sensitivity, 
or making changes in their routine.  
Even for individuals without disabilities, toilet training can 
present both the caregiver and child with obstacles to immediate 
success, and most children will continue to have toileting 
accidents well beyond the time they stop wearing diapers.  
POLICY STATEMENT  
The Boston Public Schools acknowledges that toileting 
procedures should be planned based on individual children’s 
needs and be culturally appropriate according to the children’s 
families’ needs and beliefs. The Boston Public Schools staff will be 
aware of the diverse styles of toileting students due to cultural or 
religious practices. Program staff will use a variety of formal and 
informal strategies (including conversations) to become 


Page 2:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-24 
Page 2 of 6 
acquainted with and learn from families about their preferred 
child-rearing practices, including toilet training.  
The Boston Public Schools will be aware of and accommodate 
the need to maintain privacy for toileting and dressing.  
Boston Public Schools staff will interact in a positive manner 
during toileting procedures and support students in developing 
their self-help in this area.  
DIAPERING PROCEDURES  
Toileting accidents and diaper changing will ONLY be handled by 
a classroom teacher, classroom paraprofessional, and/or other 
adult designated by the school principal. Parents will not be 
required to change diapers and volunteers will not change 
diapers and/or assist with toileting at the school site during 
school hours.  
Each school year, the principal will complete and sign off on a 
form that states in writing who is designated to help students 
with toileting and changing diapers and who will help children 
with toileting accidents (see attached form). 
It is not the responsibility of the school nurse to assist with 
toileting and diaper changes, except for caring for students who 
have an ostomy/colostomy, require urinary catheterization, or 
have other genito-urinary diagnosis. 
 
 


Page 3:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-24 
Page 3 of 6 
Staff will follow these diapering procedures:  
● Staff to assess children for signs that diapers or pull-ups are 
wet or contain feces at least every two hours when children 
are awake and when children awaken from a rest period.  
● Diapers are changed when wet or soiled.  
● Children wearing cloth or disposable training pants and 
children who have accidents. 
● Changing should be initiated within 5 minutes of discovery 
that they are wet or soiled unless circumstances clearly 
make it unreasonably difficult to do so.  
● Staff will change children’s diapers or soiled underwear in 
the designated changing areas and not elsewhere in the 
facility.  
In the changing area, staff post and follow these procedures for 
changing diapers or pull-ups:  
● At all times, caregivers have a hand on the child to ensure 
safety is maintained when the child is being changed on an 
elevated surface.  
● Bring supplies (e.g., clean diaper, wipes, diaper cream, 
gloves, plastic or waterproof bag for soiled clothing, extra 
clothes) to the diapering/changing area.  
● Diaper cream (provided by the family): if used, dispense it 
onto a tissue and/or cotton ball and cover the diaper 
changing surface with disposable liner (paper or chuck).  
● Put on gloves.  
 
 


Page 4:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-24 
Page 4 of 6 
● Changing table, if used: place the child on a diapering 
surface and unfasten diaper. Keep one hand on the child at 
all times.  
● Clean the child with disposable wipes. Always wipe front to 
back.  
● Keep soiled diapers/clothing away from any surfaces that 
cannot be easily cleaned. 
● Securely bag soiled clothing.  
● Place used wipes in the soiled diaper or pull-up.  
● Put the soiled diaper/pull-up into two plastic bags and tie up 
the bags.  
● Discard the bags with the soiled diaper/pull-up and wipes in 
the covered trash can.  
● Remove and discard gloves.  
● Apply diaper cream, if needed, with a tissue and/or cotton 
ball or a freshly gloved finger.  
● Put on a fresh diaper or help the child put on a fresh pull-up 
or clean clothes.  
● Help the child to get dressed. Wash the child’s hands with 
soap and water and place them in a safe, supervised area.  
● When a diaper changing table is used:  
o Remove liner from the changing surface and discard in 
the trash can.  
o Wipe up any visible soil with damp paper towels or a 
baby wipe.  
o Clean the entire surface with disinfectant.  
o Wash your hands with soap and water.  


Page 5:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-24 
Page 5 of 6 
RESOURCES 
● BPS Department of Early Childhood  
● BPS Department of Special Education 
● NAEYC Early Learning Program Accreditation Standards  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 6:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-24 
Page 6 of 6 
 
Adults Designated to Change Diapers, Assist Students with 
Toileting, and/or Assist Children with Toileting Accidents 
School:  
 
School Year:  
 
Name 1: 
 
Position:  
 
Name 2: 
 
Position: 
 
 
Name 3: 
 
Position: 
 
Name 4: 
 
Position: 
 
 
Principal Signature: 
 
Date: 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SHS-21 
Version 01 
 
 
 
DIABETES POLICY  
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
BACKGROUND 
Diabetes is a chronic disease in which the body does not make or 
properly use insulin. Insulin is a hormone produced by the 
pancreas that is needed to convert sugar and starches into 
energy for the body.  People with diabetes have increased blood 
glucose (sugar) levels because they lack or have insufficient 
insulin or are resistant to insulin’s effects. High levels of glucose 
build up in the blood and spill into the urine; as a result the body 
loses its main source of fuel. 
There are many types of diabetes that affect children. The most 
common types seen in school settings include: 
• Type 1 (formerly called “Insulin-Dependent” or “Juvenile-
Onset”) Diabetes Mellitus: This type of diabetes is considered 
a disease of the immune system because the immune 
system destroys the cells in the pancreas that produce the 
hormone insulin.  People with type 1 diabetes must inject 
insulin every day because their bodies cannot produce 
insulin. It needs to be injected under the skin to be 
absorbed; it cannot be taken by mouth because it would not 
be effective. 
• Type 2 (formerly called “Non-Insulin Dependent” or “Adult-


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 2 of 13 
 
 
 
Onset”) Diabetes Mellitus: People with type 2 diabetes 
produce insulin, but the cells of the body do not respond 
normally to the insulin. This is referred to as insulin 
resistance. Type 2 diabetes can often be managed with diet 
and exercise, but some students also need medications 
taken by mouth (oral hypoglycemic agents), insulin 
injections, or both to help glucose enter their cells. 
• Pre-Diabetes: Pre-diabetes is a condition in which blood 
glucose levels are higher than normal, but not yet high 
enough to be classiﬁed as diabetes.  Before people develop 
type 2 diabetes, they almost always have pre-diabetes. 
• Gestational Diabetes (may affect teens who are pregnant): 
Gestational diabetes results from pregnancy hormones that 
cause the body to become resistant to its own insulin. 
Diabetes is the third most common chronic health disease 
affecting an estimated 2.22/1,000 children and adolescents 
according to The Search for Diabetes in Youth (SEARCH) Study 
(Pettitt et al., 2014). Children and adolescents are defined as 
youth under the age of 20 years. In 2009, approximately 191,986 or 
one in 433 youth with diabetes lived in the U.S. From these, 87% 
have type 1 diabetes and 11% have type 2 diabetes (Pettitt et al., 
2014). In the years 2008 to 2009, 18,436 youth were newly 
diagnosed with type 1 diabetes and 5,089 youth were newly 
diagnosed with type 2 diabetes (Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention [CDC], 2014). As the sixth leading cause of death by 
disease in the United States, long-term complications of diabetes 
include heart disease, stroke, blindness, kidney failure, nerve 
disease, gum disease, and amputation of the foot or leg. 
Although there is no cure, diabetes can be managed, and 
complications can be delayed or prevented. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 3 of 13 
 
 
 
Advances in diabetes technology continue to enhance students' 
ability to manage diabetes at school, thus improving their quality 
of life. Children and adolescents monitor blood glucose levels 
several times a day via blood glucose meters and continuous 
glucose monitors, conduct carbohydrate calculations, and inject 
insulin via syringe, pen, and pump to attain blood glucose control 
(Brown, 2016). Intensive resources and consistent evidenced-
based interventions will achieve the long-term health benefits of 
optimal diabetes control, according to the landmark study from 
the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group 
(DCCT, 1993).  
Coordination and collaboration among members of the school 
health team and the student’s personal diabetes health care 
team are essential for helping students manage their diabetes in 
the school setting. Members of the school health team include 
the student with diabetes, parents/guardians, school nurse, 
teacher(s), school leader, COSES, social worker, coach, physical 
education teacher, food service staff, and other school staff 
members. In addition, it is essential for team members to 
understand the federal and state laws that may apply to students 
with diabetes, including Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 
1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and the Individuals with 
Disabilities Education Act. 
The purpose of these Administrative Procedures and Guidelines 
is to: 
• Provide a safe and healthy learning environment for all 
students 
• Protect the rights of students with diabetes to participate in 
all school activities 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 4 of 13 
 
 
 
• Ensure proper medical management and safety of the 
student, minimizing the possibility that diabetes related 
emergencies might disrupt their educational and classroom 
activities 
• Facilitate self-management so that the student may 
gradually assume responsibility for their care 
• Reduce the likelihood of severe or potentially life-
threatening diabetic emergencies during school 
• Ensure a rapid and effective response in the case of a severe 
or potentially life threatening diabetic emergency 
EDUCATION AND TRAINING 
Staff to be trained includes, but are not limited to, teachers, 
paraprofessionals, food service staff, school leaders, support staff, 
and student interns/teachers. Coordination and collaboration 
among members of the school health team and the student’s 
personal diabetes health care team are essential for helping 
students manage their diabetes in the school setting.  
Education and training for key personnel by the school nurse will 
include: 
• an overview of diabetes 
• signs and symptoms of diabetes, including 
hyper/hypoglycemia  
• role and responsibilities in prevention and reducing risks 
• recognizing and responding to a diabetic emergency 
• review of the student’s Individual Health Plan (IHP) and 
Diabetes Emergency Action plan 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 5 of 13 
 
 
 
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
Role of the Parent/Guardian 
• At the time of registration, inform the Welcome Center staff 
of any health concerns of their child, including Type 1 
Diabetes.  The Health Services Department remains 
available to support any student or parent/guardian wishing 
to discuss this information privately.  
• Provide the school nurse with a current diabetes medical 
management plan and emergency management plan from 
the student’s endocrinologist. It is recommended that the 
parent/guardian meet with the school nurse in person to 
discuss their child’s plan. 
• Actively participate with the school nurse in creating an 
individualized healthcare plan for school that supports the 
student’s medical, educational, and developmental needs 
• Provide the school nurse with the necessary supplies 
needed to care for the student during the school day: 
insulin, glucometer, glucagon, syringes, etc. In the case of an 
insulin pump: extra insulin delivery catheter, insulin, insulin 
receptacle. 
• Provide the school nurse with the carbohydrate count for 
each item when lunch or snack is brought from home. 
• Provide current contact information including cell phone 
numbers (if available), emergency numbers, and at least two 
back up numbers to call if parents/guardians are not 
reachable. 
• Educate after-school activities personnel about the diabetic 
management plan and provide a plan as necessary. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 6 of 13 
 
 
 
Role of the School Administrator 
• Facilitate diabetes management training for school 
personnel. 
• Support faculty, staff, and parents in implementing all 
aspects of the Diabetes Management Plan. 
• Identify all staff members who have responsibility for the 
student with diabetes throughout the school day and 
during school-sponsored extracurricular activities and field 
trips. 
• Ensure there is a contingency plan in the case of a 
substitute nurse, teacher, or food service personnel. 
• Ensure that the classroom staff have been trained in an 
overview of diabetes, how to recognize and respond to 
hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia and the steps to take in 
the event of an emergency. 
• Make certain that emergency communication devices (e.g., 
walkie-talkie, intercom, cell phone, etc.) are always present 
and functional. 
• Promote a supportive learning environment for students 
with diabetes to manage their diabetes safely and 
effectively at school. 
• Inform the school nurse 4-6 weeks in advance of field trips 
to thoroughly support a student's participation in a field trip 
and ensure adequate planning time (e.g. necessity for 
nursing support during the field trip). 
• Understand the federal and state laws that may apply to 
students with diabetes, including Section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 7 of 13 
 
 
 
Act, and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. 
Role of the School Nurse: 
• Obtain and review the student’s current Diabetes Medical 
Management Plan (DMMP) along with other pertinent 
information from the student’s parents/guardians and 
health care providers. 
• Obtain releases for nurse/health care provider 
communication and physician authorization for medication. 
• Develop an Individualized Health Care Plan (IHP). Promote 
and encourage independence and self-care consistent with 
the student’s ability, skill, maturity, and development as 
indicated in the DMMP. After reviewing the IHP with the 
parents/guardians and student, implement, review, and 
update the plan throughout the school year as needed. 
• Develop a plan for student management in the classroom, 
lunchroom, playground, athletics, and field trips that 
provides for routine and emergency care. These would 
include blood glucose monitoring; urine/blood ketone 
testing; insulin administration; glucagon administration; and 
assistance with carbohydrate counting. 
• Perform or assist the student with routine and emergency 
diabetes care tasks, including blood glucose monitoring, 
urine or blood ketone testing, insulin and other medication 
administration, carbohydrate counting, and glucagon 
administration. 
•  Maintain accurate documentation in the electronic health 
record of all diabetes care provided at school. Document 
communications with the student, the parents/guardians, 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 8 of 13 
 
 
 
and the student’s personal diabetes health care team, and 
document communications related to the training and 
supervision of trained diabetes personnel. 
• Ensure that all other staff members who have contact with 
students with diabetes are familiar with their Individual 
Health Care Plans (IHPs) on a need-to-know basis. 
• Provide a list of students with diabetes (if consent given by 
parent) to all staff on a need-to-know basis, including bus 
drivers. 
• Conduct in-service training and education for appropriate 
staff regarding a student’s symptoms; risk reduction 
procedures; emergency procedures; and appropriate 
responses to symptoms of diabetic emergencies. This 
includes PE instructors and coaches. This training should be 
repeated annually or when a student transfers classrooms or 
schools.  
• Ensure that there is a contingency plan in place for all 
school-related venues where substitutes are utilized. 
• Encourage the students to eat all meals and snacks fully and 
on time. Be flexible with time requirements for eating and 
provide the parent or guardian with the carbohydrate 
menu. 
• Make certain that emergency communication devices (e.g., 
walkie-talkie, intercom, cell phone, etc.) are always present 
and functional. 
• Participate in the teams that develop and implement the 
student’s Section 504 Plan, other education plan, or 
individualized education program. Contribute to IEP, and 
504 implementation of diabetes related issues, where 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 9 of 13 
 
 
 
appropriate. 
• Communicate with the student’s parents/guardians and—
with their permission—communicate with the student’s 
personal diabetes health care team about progress as well 
as any concerns about the student’s diabetes management 
or health status, such as hypoglycemia episodes, 
hyperglycemia, general attitude, emotional issues, and self-
management. 
Role of the Coordinator of Special Education (COSE): 
• If a student is referred for consideration for a 504 
accommodation plan and/or special education, the COSE 
will process as appropriate. The parent/guardian, school 
nurse and other school staff must be involved in the plan 
development and implementation. 
• If a student is eligible for a 504 accommodation plan (or is 
being evaluated for a 504 accommodation plan), the team 
will discuss eligibility for transportation. 
• If a student already has an IEP (or is being evaluated) and 
transportation may be necessary for the medical condition 
(but not necessarily the area of educational disability), the 
team will consider transportation needs (team will include 
school nurse). If special transportation is found to be 
necessary, it can be added to the IEP. 
 
Role of the Teacher 
• Have a list of all students in the classroom with chronic 
diseases, including diabetes. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 10 of 13 
 
 
 
• Participate in team meetings for students with diabetes and 
participate in in-service training provided by the school 
nurse. 
• Be prepared to respond immediately to the signs and 
symptoms of hypoglycemia (low blood glucose) and 
hyperglycemia (high blood glucose), in accordance with the 
student’s Emergency Care Plans for Hypoglycemia and 
Hyperglycemia. 
• Keep accessible the student’s emergency plan with a photo 
(where possible) in the classroom (with parent's permission) 
or keep with the lesson plan. 
• Inform volunteers, student teachers, aides, specialists, and 
substitute teachers about the student’s condition both 
through verbal communication and in an organized, 
prominent, and accessible written format. 
• Recognize that eating meals and snacks on time is a critical 
component of diabetes management. 
• Coordinate with parent/guardian to provide lesson plans to 
accommodate any learning needs. 
• Support the student in participating in all school-sponsored 
activities. 
• Inform the school nurse 4-6 weeks in advance of field trips 
to ensure adequate planning time for supports. 
• Notify the school nurse and parents/guardians in advance of 
changes in the school schedule, such as class parties, field 
trips, and other special events. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 11 of 13 
 
 
 
Role of Physical Education Teacher and Coaches 
• Have a list of all students in their charge who have diabetes. 
• Coaches will be told of any students on their teams who 
have diabetes through review in ASPEN/Sports Clearance, 
and will be trained in identification of symptoms of diabetes 
emergencies. 
• Participate in in-service training about diabetes as needed.  
• Keep accessible the student's emergency plan with a photo 
(where possible) in the specific venue (with parent's 
permission). 
• Allow students with diabetes to wear their insulin pump 
and/or sensor and medical ID during physical activity. 
• Designate a safe place for students to keep their diabetes 
supplies, including their insulin pump, if they remove it 
during physical activity. 
• Make sure blood glucose monitoring equipment and a 
quick-acting form of glucose are available at all activity sites. 
• Include the student’s Emergency Care Plans for 
Hypoglycemia and Hyperglycemia and diabetes supplies in 
the first aid pack that goes out to physical education 
activities, practices, and games. 
• Allow the student to monitor blood glucose levels and/or 
administer insulin, as outlined in the student’s health care 
plans and education plans. 
•  Recognize that a change in the student’s behavior could be 
a symptom of blood glucose changes. 
• Understand and be aware that hypoglycemia (low blood 
glucose) can occur during and after physical activity. 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 12 of 13 
 
 
 
• Inform substitutes about the student’s diagnosis and the 
signs and symptoms of hyper or hypoglycemia. 
Role of Food Services 
• Work with health services to provide access to carbohydrate 
menus to parents and school nurses and assist in 
carbohydrate counting activities. 
• Make available and maintain current food labels for all meal 
plans. Provide nutrition information on all menu items and a 
la carte items to the school staff and parents/guardians. 
Role of the Office of Transportation  
• Provide training for all bus monitors for medical 
emergencies, including but not limited to Heartsaver 
CPR/AED, Heartsaver First Aid. 
• Know local EMS (Emergency Medical Services) procedures. 
• Have functioning communication equipment to access EMS 
• Understand that a student with diabetes may need to have 
a snack to regulate their blood sugar, despite the policy of 
no food eating allowed on the bus. 
• Encourage 1:1 communication between bus monitors and 
school-based staff as well as between bus monitors and 
parents/guardians. 
Role of the School Bus Company 
• Provide training for all bus drivers for medical emergencies, 
including but not limited to Heartsaver CPR/AED and 
Heartsaver First Aid. 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 13 of 13 
 
 
 
• Know local EMS (Emergency Medical Services) procedures. 
• Have functioning communication equipment to access EMS. 
• Understand that a student with diabetes may need to have 
a snack to regulate their blood sugar, despite the policy of 
no food eating allowed on the bus. 
REFERENCES 
• Massachusetts | ADA 
• Diabetes Management in the School Setting 
• Diabetes | Healthy Schools | CDC 
• Diabetes Care Tasks at School | ADA 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
SHS-11 
Version 01 
 
 
 
 LIFE-THREATENING ALLERGIES (LTA OR ANAPHYLAXIS) 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
POLICY 
The Massachusetts Department of Education recommends that 
all school districts have policies and protocols regarding the care 
of students with life-threatening food allergies. This is in addition 
to 2012, c.77, An Act Relative to Medical Emergency Response 
Plans for Schools, requiring local school districts to develop 
efficient written medical response plans for responding to life-
threatening emergencies.  
 
Massachusetts Department of Public Health Regulations 
governing the Administration of Prescription Medications in 
Public and Private Schools 105 C.M.R. 210.100(A)(4) and (A)(4)(c)(iv) 
authorize school personnel who are trained and tested for 
competency to administer epinephrine by auto-injector to 
individuals with previously diagnosed life-threatening allergies 
who are experiencing an anaphylactic event. School districts 
must be registered with the Massachusetts Department of Public 
Health for this purpose.  
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-11 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
 
BACKGROUND ON ANAPHYLAXIS 
Anaphylaxis is a sudden, severe, potentially fatal, systemic allergic 
reaction that can involve various areas of the body (such as the 
skin, respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract, and cardiovascular 
system). Symptoms occur within minutes to two hours after 
contact with the allergy-causing substance, but in rare instances 
may occur up to four hours later.  Anaphylactic reactions can be 
mild to life-threatening. The annual incidence of anaphylactic 
reactions is about 30 per 100,000 persons, and individuals with 
asthma, eczema, or hay fever are at a greater relative risk of 
experiencing anaphylaxis. The most common allergens in 
children are food and bee-sting. 
Because of the life-threatening nature of this condition, it is 
important for schools to develop and implement care plans for all 
children identified with life-threatening allergic reactions. 
The Massachusetts Department of Public Health regulations 
provides for the administration of epinephrine by auto-injector by 
non-medical personnel who have been trained by the school 
nurse in the administration of epinephrine by auto-injector 
delivery. In consultation with the school physician, the school 
nurse leader has the final decision-making authority about the 
program, which must be in accordance with MA DPH standards. 
This includes school-sponsored programs as well as before and 
after school when a nurse is not immediately available. 
The Boston School Committee, as part of the Superintendent's 
Circular SHS-08 Medication Administration, has approved the 
training of administration of epinephrine by auto-injector for 
students with identified allergies under the supervision of the 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-11 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
 
school nurse. 
The purpose of these Administrative Procedures and Guidelines 
is to: 
• Provide a safe and healthy learning environment for all 
students 
• Protect the rights of students with food allergies to 
participate in all school activities 
• Reduce the likelihood of severe or potentially life-
threatening allergic reactions during school 
• Ensure a rapid and effective response in the case of a 
severe or potentially life-threatening allergic reaction. 
 
EDUCATION AND TRAINING 
Staff to be trained includes, but are not limited to, teachers, 
paraprofessionals, food service staff, school leaders, support staff, 
and student interns/teachers.  
Education and training by the school nurse will include: 
• Identification of potential food allergens  
• Role and responsibilities in the prevention and reducing 
risks 
• Recognizing allergic reactions 
• Responding to an allergic reaction 
• How to administer an epinephrine auto-injector 
(EpiPen®). 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-11 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
 
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
Role of the Parent: 
• Inform the school nurse if their child has a Life-
Threatening Allergy (with specific information regarding 
the allergen (i.e. food types, insect, medication)) 
• Provide the school with a list of allergens, the Individual 
Health Plan (IHP) (preferably with a Food Allergy action 
plan, where appropriate), and a physician order for 
epinephrine auto-injector administration 
• Provide physician/provider documentation regarding 
allergy, diagnosis and treatment 
• Work with the school nurse, school leader, and classroom 
teacher to develop and implement the Allergy Action Plan 
+/or IHP for ensuring that their child is safe from potential 
allergens 
• Provide an epinephrine auto-injector(s) and other 
physician-ordered emergency medication if indicated to 
the school nurse 
• Sign release of information/permission for identified 
school staff to have information about their child’s allergy 
• Provide current contact information, including emergency 
contacts 
• Ensure that the pre-school and after-school staff have the 
appropriate information. 
 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-11 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
 
Role of the School Administrator: 
• Support training for school staff, provided by the school 
nurse at the beginning of every school year and as needed 
• Support faculty, staff, and parents in implementing all 
aspects of the LTA (Life-Threatening Allergy) program 
• Consider a school-wide policy, with input from the School 
Site Council, for avoiding LTA's wherever possible (i.e., 
peanut-free zones, no food at functions, etc.) 
• Provide emergency communication devices (two-way 
radio, intercom, walkie-talkie, cell phone) for all school 
activities, including transportation, that involve a student 
with life-threatening allergies 
• Ensure there is a contingency plan in the case of a 
substitute nurse, teacher, or food service personnel 
• Ensure that 911/EMS is activated (in the event of an 
exposure).  
Role of the School Nurse: 
• Provide training at least annually (beginning of school 
year) for school staff that will include information on food 
allergies, risk reduction procedures, how to recognize an 
allergic reaction, and how to respond in the event of an 
allergic reaction, including the use of an epinephrine auto-
injector. Training will include a return demonstration by 
school staff on the administration of an epinephrine auto-
injector. 
• Obtain an Individual Health Plan (IHP) from the 
family/primary care provider (this should include the 
specifics about a food allergy action plan) 
• Develop a plan for child management in the classroom, 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-11 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
 
lunchroom, playground, field trips, and emergency 
situations 
• Ensure that all other staff members who have contact 
with students with life-threatening allergies (LTAs) are 
familiar with their IHPs on a need-to-know basis 
• Provide a list of students with life-threatening allergies (if 
consent is given by parent) to all staff on a need-to-know 
basis (including transportation staff) 
• Conduct in-service training and education for appropriate 
staff regarding a child's life-threatening allergens, 
symptoms, risk reduction procedures, emergency 
procedures, and how to administer an epinephrine auto-
injector  
• Post general emergency protocol and location of an 
epinephrine auto-injector; Epinephrine should not be 
locked away but should be available to school staff in a 
secure location and must be readily available for use in an 
emergency situation 
• Ensure that all IHPs for children with LTAs are readily 
available for transport with EMS 
• Ensure that there is a contingency plan in place in all 
school-related venues where substitutes are utilized 
• Communicate with parents on a regular basis to discuss 
issues relating to the plan 
• In the event of epinephrine auto-injector administration, 
complete the Massachusetts Department of Public 
Health’s epinephrine auto-injector administration form 
and alert Health Services 
 
Role of the Teacher: 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-11 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
 
• Receive training at least annually to recognize symptoms 
of allergic reaction and to understand their role as a 
responder in the event of an allergic reaction; including 
the use of an epinephrine auto-injector (i.e.EpiPen®) 
• Collaborate with the school nurse and parent/guardian to 
develop and implement a plan for ensuring that their child 
is safe from potential allergens, including field trips, 
classroom festivities, arts & crafts activities, and cafeteria 
management 
• Maintain a list of all students in the classroom with LTA; 
include the list in the substitute teacher folder 
• Participate in a team meeting for a child with life-
threatening allergies and in-service training about LTAs 
• Keep accessible the child's emergency plan with a photo 
(where possible) in the classroom (with parent's 
permission) or keep with the lesson plan 
• Inform volunteers, student teachers, aides, specialists, and 
substitute teachers about the child's food/other allergies 
and necessary safeguards by both verbal communication 
and in an organized, prominent, and accessible written 
format 
• Coordinate with the parent on providing a lesson plan 
about food allergies for the class and discuss anaphylaxis 
in age-appropriate terms, with the child's permission 
• Remind students never to share or trade food 
• Inform parents about events involving food 
• Provide the school nurse 4-6 weeks in advance with dates 
for field trips & school-sponsored off-site activities 
• Discuss with the parent the process for ensuring before 
and after school continuity of access to epinephrine auto-
injector administration and allergen reduction. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-11 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
 
Role of Off-site Staff (Athletics): 
• Maintain a list of all students in their charge who have LTA 
• Athletic coaches will be informed via review of sports 
clearances in ASPEN of any students on their teams who 
have LTAs  
• Coaches will participate in training at the school level that 
will include information on Life-Threatening Allergies, risk 
reduction procedures, how to recognize an allergic 
reaction, and how to respond in the event of an allergic 
reaction, including the use of an epinephrine auto-injector 
and return demonstration 
• Encourage these students to carry the epinephrine auto-
injectors to all practices and events   
• Ensure the off-site staff has knowledge of the child with 
the allergy, their specific allergy, and symptoms that they 
may suffer during a reaction:  
o Ensure that the off-site staff knows to call 911 or 
other emergency numbers and request an 
Advanced Life Support unit if a reaction occurs.  
o Allow a responsible child to carry their own 
epinephrine auto-injector in their backpack.  
• Keep accessible the child's emergency plan in the specific 
venue (with parent's permission) 
• Inform substitutes about the child's food/other allergies 
and necessary safeguards by both verbal communication 
and in an organized, prominent, and accessible written 
format. 
Role of Food Services: 
• Provide a food preparation environment that follows 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-11 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
 
sound food handling to avoid cross-contamination and 
procedures to address food-allergic students 
• Ensure all food service staff are able to recognize 
symptoms of allergic reaction and to understand their 
roles as a responder in the event of an allergic reaction; 
including the use of an epinephrine auto-injector. 
Role of the School Transportation Company: 
• Provide training for all bus drivers on managing life-
threatening allergies 
• Be familiar with local EMS procedures 
• Have functioning communication equipment to access 
EMS 
• Maintain a policy of “No food/drink consumed on the bus”. 
 
Details of management and all necessary forms are available in 
the Nurses’ Protocol and Procedure Manual (available to BPS 
School Nurses) 
• Managing Food Allergies in Schools The Role of School 
Teachers and Paraeducators 
• FAACT Education for School Personnel 
 
REFERENCES 
Mass.gov Report epi-pen administration 
Mass.gov School Health Services: Medication Administration 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-11 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
September 2024 
All staff should have a Life-Threatening Allergy 
review & epinephrine auto-injector demonstration 
by the school nurse 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
SHS-06 
Version 01 
 
 
 
IMMUNIZATION LAW 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
THE IMMUNIZATION REGULATIONS 
It is the policy of the Boston Public Schools to enforce the School 
Immunization Law, Chapter 76, Section 15, of the Massachusetts 
General Laws: 
“No child shall, except as hereinafter provided, be admitted to 
school except upon presentation of a physician's certificate that 
the child has been successfully immunized against diphtheria, 
pertussis, tetanus, measles and poliomyelitis and such other 
communicable diseases as may be specified from time to time by 
the department of public health. A child shall be admitted to 
school upon certification by a physician that he has personally 
examined such child and that in his opinion, the physical 
condition of the child is such that his health would be 
endangered by such vaccination or by any of such 
immunizations. Such certification shall be submitted at the 
beginning of each school year to the physician in charge of the 
school health program. If the physician in charge of the school 
health program does not agree with the opinion of the child's 
physician, the matter shall be referred to the department of 
public health, whose decision will be final. In the absence of an 
emergency or epidemic of disease declared by the department of 
public health, no child whose parent or guardian states in writing 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-06 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 
 
that vaccination or immunization conflicts with his sincere 
religious beliefs shall be required to present said physician's 
certificate in order to be admitted to school.”    
 
MCKINNEY-VENTO HOMELESS ASSISTANCE ACT 
Under the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, state and 
local educational agencies must ensure that homeless children 
and youths have equal access to the same free, appropriate 
public education, including a public preschool education, as 
provided to other children and youths. Children and youth who 
are homeless are to be enrolled in school, even if the child or 
youth is unable to produce records normally required for 
enrollment, such as previous academic records, medical records, 
proof of residency, or other documentation. If the child or youth 
needs to obtain immunizations, or immunization or medical 
records, the enrolling school shall immediately refer the parent or 
guardian of the child or youth to the local educational agency 
liaison who shall assist in obtaining necessary immunizations or 
medical records. 
 
PROTOCOL FOR ENFORCING IMMUNIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
New students, during the priority registration period: 
● Parents must bring proof of immunizations upon registering 
for school at all Welcome Center locations. 
● It is preferred that all students be up to date with all state-
required immunizations at the time of registration for the 
upcoming school year. If the child’s medical appointment 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-06 
Page 3 of 6 
 
 
 
falls between the priority registration period and September 
of the upcoming school year, the parent must provide a 
valid appointment card with all the following information on 
it: 
o registering student’s full name 
o registering student’s date of birth 
o name of the clinic/hospital where the appointment is 
scheduled. 
o date of the registering student’s appointment for 
vaccination and/or physical exam 
• If the student does not have the appropriate immunizations 
during the priority registration period, the student will be 
registered but will not be allowed to attend until the 
immunization documents are submitted to either the 
Welcome Center or the student’s assigned school prior to 
the start of school. 
• The type and number of immunizations vary with age and 
whether the student-initiated the immunization process 
after the age of 7 years or before. See attached state 
guidelines. 
 
New students, current rolling registration: 
• Parents must bring proof of immunizations upon registering 
for school at all Welcome Center locations. 
• All students must have all state-required immunizations at 
the time of registration in order to attend school during the 
current school year. In the event the child’s physical 
examination appointment falls after the date of registration, 
the parent must provide a valid appointment card with all 
the following information on it: 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-06 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 
 
o registering student’s full name 
o registering student’s date of birth 
o name of the clinic/hospital where the appointment is 
scheduled. 
o date of the registering student’s appointment for 
vaccination and/or physical exam 
● If the student is not up to date with immunizations prior to 
starting the current school year, the student will be 
registered but will not be allowed to attend until the 
immunization documents are submitted to either the 
Welcome Center, the Health Services Department, or the 
student’s assigned school.  
● The type and number of immunizations vary with age and 
whether the student-initiated the immunization process 
after the age of 7 years or before. See attached state 
guidelines. 
 
Continuing students: 
• All continuing students who are identified as being behind 
on immunizations will be notified that they will be excluded 
from school if there is no compliance with immunization 
updating. This is a necessary action because if there is a 
vaccine-preventable disease outbreak at the school (i.e., 
measles), all susceptible students and staff (i.e., those with 
no record of vaccination, disease, or blood test for immunity) 
MUST be excluded from school for the duration of the 
disease outbreak per the MA Department of Public Health 
and Boston Public Health Commission. 
• It is important to note that students whose immunization 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-06 
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
 
schedule has been interrupted and are in the process of 
being immunized (i.e., awaiting the next DPT/TD or polio 
dose and in the specified time interval between doses) may 
remain in school until the next dose is given. 
 
EXCEPTIONS 
ALL EXEMPTIONS RELIGIOUS/MEDICAL EXEMPTIONS MUST BE 
RENEWED ANNUALLY BY PARENT/GUARDIAN. 
• Students at any level whose parent or guardian provides a 
statement in writing that all immunizations or a specific 
immunization conflict with their sincere religious beliefs. 
• Students at any level who present a physician's certificate 
exempting a child from an immunization(s) due to a medical 
contraindication: the reason why an individual cannot 
medically receive the vaccine(s).  
 
The Massachusetts Department of Public Health has 
immunization recommendations based on grade. Please refer to 
the MDPH website for the current schedule and detailed 
immunization guidelines. 
Department 
Contact Information 
Health 
Services 
Office: 617-635-6788       Fax: 617-635-7937 
Welcome 
Services 
Office: 617-635-9085       Fax: 617-635-9703 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-06 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 
 
 
Date 
Activity 
September 
All new students and students entering grades, 
K2, 1, 4, 6, 10, 11 will be asked to provide an updated 
immunization record prior to the start of the 
school year in compliance with current 
Massachusetts Department of Public Health 
requirements. 
Monthly 
Letters will be sent to parents/guardians 
requesting immunization records for students 
with missing immunizations.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SHS-22 
Version 01 
 
RESPONSE TO CARDIAC ARREST IN SCHOOLS AND 
SCHOOL PROPERTY: AUTOMATIC EXTERNAL 
DEFIBRILLATOR (AED) USE AND ACCESS POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
POLICY STATEMENT 
The Boston Public Schools recognizes that an Emergency 
Medical Response Plan is multifaceted and is designed to 
respond to life-threatening medical emergencies in the first 
minutes before emergency medical services arrive. The elements 
of the policy include: effective communication throughout the 
individual school and the district, a coordinated and practiced 
response plan, risk reduction, training and equipment for first aid 
and CPR, and a lay rescuer AED program. 
This policy addresses the Cardiac Arrest Plan and focuses on CPR 
and AED use. It interfaces with Superintendent’s Circulars  FSE-
05 Medical Emergencies; FSE-01 School Safety and Contingency 
Plans; and SHS-11 Life-Threatening Allergies. It is also coordinated 
with the City of Boston Public Access Defibrillator Program 
(PAD). Detailed procedures and protocols, including a 
Memorandum of Agreement between BPS and Boston EMS, are 
available through Facilities Management. 
 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 2 of 22 
 
BACKGROUND 
Sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) presents a potential life-threatening 
situation to students, staff, and visitors, and quick response 
actions and interventions like cardio-pulmonary resuscitation 
(CPR) and proper use of an automatic external defibrillator (AED) 
within the first two (2) minutes significantly increases the chance 
of SCA survival.  
PROTOCOL FOR DISTRICTWIDE RESPONSIBILITIES 
The City of Boston’s Public Access Defibrillator Program (PAD) 
requires that a systemwide policy be established that interfaces 
with the district's School Safety and Contingency Plans. These 
plans are submitted each year.  
In BPS, the AED/CPR policy is directed by an AED/CPR 
Committee. This systemwide AED Committee includes but is not 
limited to representation from Health Services, Facilities 
Management (Environmental and Safety), BPS Operations, and 
City of Boston’s Emergency Management Services (BEMS). The 
responsibility of this team is to oversee the AED and CPR 
program, including quality assurance, data review of critical 
incidents, equipment maintenance, inventory management, 
coordinated and practiced response exercises, and lay CPR and 
AED training.  
• All school buildings have been provided with AEDs.  All BPS 
school buildings with an AED will need to register their 
individual plans along with their annual safety contingency 
plans. Staff who have been trained in CPR will be added to 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 3 of 22 
 
the school safety contingency plan and reviewed/updated 
annually. 
• AEDs have been provided to the BPS Athletics Program for 
selected coaches to have in their possession during any 
athletic event or practice. The BPS Athletic Program shall 
meet the same requirements and intent of the AED/CPR 
program for school buildings, including providing an 
inventory of the AEDs and their designated coaches (those 
coaches who are responsible for the AED during their sport’s 
season). 
PROTOCOL FOR INDIVIDUAL SCHOOL RESPONSIBILITIES 
Principal/Head of School: 
• Ensures that there is an appropriately trained AED/CPR 
coordinator at their school.* 
• Ensures that there is the required number of CPR trained 
personnel in the school. 
• Includes the AED/CPR plan in the annual safety and 
contingency plan submission to the director of Fire Safety 
and Emergency Preparedness.  
• Reviews and submits the annual AED/CPR plan to Safety 
Services (safety and contingency plan). 
• Oversees the placement of AEDs. 
• Ensures that the required staff are appropriately trained in 
CPR and AED use. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 4 of 22 
 
• Ensures periodic checks are done to better ensure safe and 
continuous operability and access to the AED.  These checks 
shall include but not be limited to the following: 
o Daily check of AED indicator light: Check the active 
status indicator light on your AED. It varies depending 
on the brand. If any problems contact Richard Deraney, 
Director of Safety/Emergency Preparedness. 
o Weekly check: Check the condition of the AED and 
accessories (including but not limited to the AED, the 
pads (infant and adult), and the AED alarmed metal 
cabinet.    
o Monthly check: Check pads and battery pack for 
expiration dates and AED signage throughout the 
building. 
o Quarterly submission of logs to the AED/CPR 
committee. 
* A member of your school site safety team is strongly 
recommended. 
School Nurse: 
• Reviews plans with the AED/CPR coordinator.  
• Is up to date in CPR/AED training as required by 
employment.  
• Includes plan in substitute school nurse folder. 
 
Athletic Coaches: 
• Participate in training in CPR/AED. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 5 of 22 
 
• Ensure that protocols are in place. 
• Review plans with the school nurse. 
BPS Athletics: 
• Ensures that all coaches are in compliance with AED/CPR 
guidelines. 
• Ensures that all athletic trainers providing services to BPS 
Athletics are in compliance with AED/CPR guidelines. 
Trained Staff: 
• Reviews CPR/AED plan for individual school. 
• Reviews Safety and contingency plans for school. 
• Participates in training. 
 
Detailed information on protocols and training is available in 
Health Services & Safety Services, when available. 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 6 of 22 
 
Date 
Activity 
October 1 
Annual Review of AED Program. This will be part of 
the school’s Building Safety and Fire Safety Plans. If 
there are any changes, you will submit a copy to 
BPS Safety/Emergency Preparedness.   
October 1 
BPS Athletics shall provide a list of coaches with 
AEDS and training verifications to 
Safety/Emergency Preparedness 
November 1 
School leaders and building administrators shall 
contact Office of Health and Wellness: Physical 
Education to receive Anytime (Hands Only) CPR 
training and equipment for their physical 
education teachers.  
May 1 
9th grade Physical Education teachers shall receive 
Anytime CPR training as needed and implement 
the lesson with their students.  
June 1 
Annual Review of AED Policy by AED Committee 
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 7 of 22 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
OR 
Contact: 
Director of Safety & Emergency Management 
Department: Safety & Emergency Management 
Mailing 
Address: 
205 Townsend Street Boston, MA 02121 
Phone: 
(617) 635-9122 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 8 of 22 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT 
AUTOMATIC EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATION PROGRAM 
 
THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into on ________________ 
and is between the Boston Public Schools (BPS) and Boston 
Emergency Medical Services (EMS). 
The purpose of this agreement is to establish training and quality 
assurance programs for the utilization of automatic external 
defibrillators (AED) by volunteer, trained Boston Public Schools 
personnel.  Those trained personnel will function under the 
medical supervision of the BPS medical director and the assistant 
director of Health Services in collaboration with EMS medical 
director. 
The Parties now mutually agree to the following: 
The Boston Public Schools (BPS) agrees: 
1. To identify an AED/CPR coordinator from Safety Services to 
assume responsibility for coordinating the AED/CPR 
committee and monthly meetings. This committee will 
include representation from EMS and oversee aspects of the 
Public Access Defibrillation program in BPS. 
2. To conduct CPR/AED training programs that are approved 
by the American Heart Association, American Red Cross, 
American Safety and Health Institute, or BPS approved 
equivalent. 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 9 of 22 
 
3. To establish a quality assurance program that reviews all 
AED response events with the EMS medical director, BPS 
medical director, assistant director of Health Services, EMS 
liaison, and BPS responders. 
4. To maintain a database for AED training programs and 
share trained personnel information rosters with the EMS. 
5. To notify EMS annually of the types of AEDs and location of 
units in each building. 
6. To maintain database information regarding the AED daily 
checks and maintenance information for each unit. 
7. To follow the protocols approved by Boston Public Schools 
for AED use in BPS. 
8. To notify EMS of any changes in program, location, or 
equipment. 
9. In case of an incident, provide EMS with cardiac event data 
cards for evaluation and feedback. 
10. Work collaboratively with the EMS on student CPR training 
programs 
Boston EMS agrees to: 
1. Identify the medical director of EMS as the overall medical 
director of the BPS AED program. 
2. Identify an EMS liaison that will collaborate with BPS on AED 
implementation in the schools. 
3. Maintain records of location/types of machines, trained 
personnel sent by BPS program coordinator. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 10 of 22 
 
4. Provide feedback, after a response incident, from the 
cardiac event data card to BPS CPR/AED coordinator and 
BPS medical director and other members of the AED/CPR 
committee for review. 
5. Provide “Train the Trainer” CPR/AED programs to BPS 
designated volunteer employees. 
 
This memorandum will be reviewed on an annual basis. 
 __________________________________________________________________  
 
In witness whereof, the parties hereto execute this Agreement 
through their duly authorized representatives as of ________ day 
of ________________, 20____. 
BOSTON EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES 
By:  ______________________________________ Date:   _________________  
 
Its:  _______________________________________________________________  
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
 
___________________________________________Date:  _______________ 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 11 of 22 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
PUBLIC ACCESS DEFIBRILLATION PROGRAM AND  
CPR GUIDELINES 
 
PURPOSE:  The purpose of the Boston Public Schools Public 
Access Defibrillation (PAD) Program guidelines is to assist 
employees of the Boston Public Schools who are trained and 
willing to do CPR, including use of an Automatic External 
Defibrillator (AED) in the event such use is necessary.  These 
guidelines do not create an obligation to do CPR and use the 
AEDs, nor to create any expectation that either an AED or trained 
employee will be present at every event.  The guidelines should 
make clear that by increasing the availability of AEDs and 
increasing the number of persons trained to use them, that both 
the school and larger community may be aided.  Evidence shows 
that time is a significant factor in victim survival rate, and on-site 
responders are more likely to arrive faster than EMS to begin aid 
to incidents of “sudden death”.  By equipping and training 
voluntary employees in the use of AEDs, we will increase the 
potential to save lives through AED intervention. 
DEFINITION:  The condition “sudden death” occurs when the 
electrical impulses of the human heart malfunction, causing a 
disturbance in the heart’s electrical rhythm called “ventricular 
fibrillation (VF)”.  This erratic and ineffective electrical heart 
rhythm causes complete cessation of the heart’s normal function 
of pumping oxygenated blood, resulting in “sudden death”.  The 
most effective treatment for this condition is the administration 
of an electrical current to the heart by a defibrillator, within the 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 12 of 22 
 
shortest time possible of VF onset.  Each minute of delay in 
defibrillator use decreases the survival rate by 10%. 
PROGRAM PROCEDURES:  The Boston Public Schools anticipates 
that where reasonably possible, employees who have been 
trained and who are present when an incident occurs will react 
by activating the EMS system (calling 9-1-1 or 9-9-1-1), begin CPR, 
and utilize the AED available to them according to the guidelines 
of the American Heart Association. 
PROGRAM OVERSIGHT: The City of Boston’s Public Access 
Defibrillator Program (PAD) requires that a systemwide policy be 
established.  This system-wide AED committee includes but is 
not limited to representation from Health Services (Health 
Services), Facilities Management (Environmental and Safety), BPS 
Operations, and City of Boston’s Emergency Management 
Services (BEMS). This committee meets monthly and guides the 
program implementation and quality assurance. 
The EMS medical director agrees to act as the medical director 
for the BPS PAD Program, ensuring its consistency with the 
Community AED Public Access program and reviewing each 
deployment of the AED with the BPS team.   
The Boston Public Schools physician / medical director is 
responsible for: writing prescriptions for purchase of AEDs; 
reviewing and approving guidelines for emergency procedures 
related to the use of AEDs; reviewing all AED deployments; and 
coordination with the local EMS medical director for consistency 
of operation. 
The BPS assistant director of Health Services (nursing director) 
will be the overall AED coordinator of the program, chairing the 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 13 of 22 
 
CPR/AED committee. This systemwide AED committee includes 
but is not limited to representation from Health Services (Health 
Services), Facilities Management (Environmental and Safety), BPS 
Operations, and City of Boston’s Emergency Management 
Services (BEMS). The responsibility of this team is to oversee the 
AED and CPR program, including quality assurance, data review 
of critical incidents, equipment maintenance and inventory 
management, coordinated procurement of funding, practiced 
response exercises, and lay CPR and AED training. 
PRE-PROGRAM EVALUATION AND AED SELECTION 
Only US FDA approved AEDs will be provided for this program.  
The program manager and Facilities Management Department 
will maintain the specification/technical information sheet for 
each approved AED on file assigned and/or donated to the PAD 
program. 
All BPS schools have at least one AED. 
AEDs have been provided to the BPS Athletics Program for 
selected coaches to have in their possession during any athletic 
event or practice. The BPS Athletics Program shall meet the 
same requirements and intent of the AED program for school 
buildings.  
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 14 of 22 
 
TRAINING  
All volunteer employees and coaches will participate in a 
recognized CPR/AED initial training course which will include the 
following content: 
• Proper use, maintenance, and periodic inspection of AED. 
• Assessment of an unconscious person to determine if a 
cardiac arrest has occurred and the appropriateness of 
applying the AED. 
• Defibrillator safety precaution to enable the user to 
administer a shock without jeopardizing the safety of the 
victim, the user, or other persons on the scene. 
• Rapid accurate assessment of the victim’s post-shock status 
to determine if further activation of AED is necessary. 
• The role of the initial rescuer in the coordination of care for 
the cardiac arrest victim on arrival of EMS personnel. 
• Scenario based practice consistent with common scenarios 
that rescuers may face.   
• Routine AED maintenance, troubleshooting options, and 
special situations that initial rescuers may encounter. 
Employees will only be held to the standards of “Good Samaritan” 
status and shall only be expected to use an AED if they have 
successfully completed the CPR/AED training and feel confident 
using the device. 
 
 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 15 of 22 
 
SKILLS REVIEW AND PROFICIENCY DEMONSTRATION 
The AED team candidate will need to demonstrate proficiency in 
adult CPR and the following: 
• Safe and effective use of the AED training device that 
conforms to the unit assigned to that location or building. 
• Perform a single or multi-shock practical exam conducted 
by a qualified AHA or ARC instructor. 
• Demonstrate common trouble-shooting techniques used 
with the AED. 
• All AED team members will participate in a CPR/AED skills 
proficiency review annually.  The PAD program manager will 
maintain the proper training and review documentation. 
LOCATION OF AEDS 
All BPS school buildings with an AED must register their plan 
with BPS Safety Services. All school buildings have been provided 
with AEDs. If additional AEDs are to be purchased, it must be 
done through BPS HS or with the approval of BPS HS. AED will be 
numbered for internal identification and inventory. These records 
shall be kept and maintained under BPS HS.  
All AEDs shall be located immediately outside the main 
administrative office unless a written exemption with stated 
reasons for another location is provided. All AEDs are placed in an 
alarmed metal cabinet with an identifying AED location sign 
above it. Other signs identifying AED location will be placed in 
common areas throughout the school building. For additional 
signage or if there are any missing or broken signs, please 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 16 of 22 
 
contact Facilities Management – Environmental Section at 617-
635-8300.  
AEDs are located outside the main administrative office because 
it is a well-identified location with continued access during 
school occupancy and operating hours. In cases of BPS school 
buildings sharing the building complex with another BPS school 
program or DYFS Community School or Center, if possible, a 
location may be chosen that would allow access to both 
programs’ operating hours.  All AEDs shall be kept in the alarmed 
metal cabinet, with the exception of AEDs provided specifically 
for BPS Athletics Department. 
MAINTENANCE AND TESTING 
Maintenance and testing will be conducted according to the 
requirements of the FDA and the AED manufacturer.  
Documentation of maintenance and testing will be maintained in 
the PAD program manager’s office (nursing coordinator) for a 
period of two years.  Documentation will record the date of 
testing and the signature of the person performing the testing.  If 
a problem with the AED is identified, the AED coordinator must 
be notified immediately. 
Responsibility for overall maintenance check assignments in 
each location will be with the BPS AED/CPR coordinator in 
coordination with a designated person in each building.  A 
person in each building will be responsible for: 
• Daily visual checks and documentation during the actual 
contracted school year. (Summer locations and checks will 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 17 of 22 
 
be determined by summer program use of the buildings, 
and Boston EMS will be notified of the Summer Plan.) 
• Prompt notification of PAD program manager for any 
equipment or supply needs. The designated building 
coordinator will be responsible for scheduling AED training 
courses in their building.  Authorized AHA instructors will 
assist with training on AED use. 
USE OF THE AED 
General 
• Scene safety is vital. Rescuers are volunteers and are not 
expected to place themselves at risk to provide aid to 
others.  To assess for scene safety: 
o Verify that the victim is not in contact with any live 
electrical connections. 
o Remove the victim from any exposure to water to a dry 
surface. 
o Refrain from use of any portable radios near the victim 
while AED is analyzing. 
• During school hours, the building program coordinator will 
be notified of any event occurring that may require the use 
of an AED. 
• During afterschool hours, a trained athletic coach or their 
designee may move the AED from its current location to 
support Athletic Department activities.  A visible notice 
must be clearly stating the location of the AED as well as the 
location of the nearest AED, if another one exists. 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 18 of 22 
 
• Contracted and community activities are not guaranteed 
access to the AED or a trained AED operator as part of 
standard school facility rental contracts. 
Actual Use of AED in a Cardiac Event 
• Determine unresponsiveness of the victim and activate the 
Emergency Response Plan (Call 9-1-1). 
o If a victim is unresponsive, call 9-1-1 (or 9-9-1-1) and get 
AED. 
o Assess victim (airway, breathing circulation). 
o Initiate CPR, if required, while AED is brought to the 
victim's side. 
o Designate a person to wait for a facility entry to direct 
EMS to location. 
o Notify nursing coordinator of use to assign backup AED 
unit, if available 
• Upon arrival of AED, place AED next to the head of the 
victim, close to the AED operator. 
• Prepare to use the AED: 
o Turn power ON. 
o Bare and prepare chest for AED use. 
o Attach AED to victim (picture guides on each pad for 
proper placement location). 
o Stop CPR while the AED device analyzes the heart 
rhythm. 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 19 of 22 
 
o Follow the machine prompts for further action.  If a 
shock is indicated, be sure all rescuers are “clear” 
before shock is administered. 
• Upon arrival, EMS shall take charge of the victim. 
o Provide victim information (name, age, known medical 
history, time of incident). 
o Provide information as to current condition and 
number of shocks delivered. 
o Defibrillator pads and electrodes shall remain in place 
on the victim.  EMS will utilize BPS AED through 
transport of victims to hospital to maintain continuity 
of event recording. 
AFTER USE OF AED 
• First responders will notify the program coordinator by 
phone of the incident, complete an incident report, and fax 
to the program coordinator. 
• A Critical Incident debriefing session will be held or 
scheduled within 24 hours for initial responders.  (Boston 
EMS may not be immediately available.) 
• The health services director and program coordinator will be 
notified of AED use and: 
o Complete follow-up report for medical directors. 
o Arrange for a quality improvement meeting of AED 
responders. 
o The AED will be checked and put back in readiness 
state. 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 20 of 22 
 
o Restock AED inventory. 
o Clean AED if needed according to manufacturer 
recommendations. 
o Document AED return readiness. 
 
 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 21 of 22 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR PROGRAM 
PARTICIPATION REQUEST FORM 
 
_________________________________________________ (Name of person 
requesting) requests implementation of the AED Program for  
 _________________________________________________________________ . 
 
(Name of school / site)  
I understand that to be eligible for the AED Program, the 
following requirements must be met:   
Funding / resources have been identified for the purchase and 
maintenance of an “APPROVED” AED. (Please consult program 
manager for list of qualifications for approved AEDs.) 
Funding source:  _________________________________________________  
 
At least 2 staff have been identified to be trained in CPR and AED. 
Staff member:   ___________________________________________________  
Staff member:  ___________________________________________________  
At least 1 primary staff member and 1 back-up (in case of 
absence) have been identified to be the building coordinator. 
 
List staff member and back-up:  


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-22 
Page 22 of 22 
 
Primary: __________________________________________________________  
Back-up: _________________________________________________________  
Planned location of the AED in the building:   
 __________________________________________________________________  
 


Page 1:
 
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SHS-23 
Version 01 
 
 
 
CONDOM ACCESSIBILITY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
 
BACKGROUND 
In June 2017, the School Committee voted to revise the district 
Wellness Policy, which includes provisions on sexual health 
education and condom accessibility in high schools. The goal of 
this policy is to support the sexual and reproductive health of 
students and to prevent negative sexual health outcomes and 
their impact on student learning. This policy establishes access to 
information and resources for students in order to reduce the 
spread of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) as 
well as decrease the number of unintended pregnancies. This 
policy increases the access and agency of BPS students to care 
for their personal health and well-being. The revised policy states: 
Under Massachusetts Law (Mass.Gen.Laws Ch.111, Section 24E) 
adolescents may seek and consent to confidential family 
planning services without parental notification. Family Planning 
services include testing and treatment for sexually transmitted 
infections and HIV, all birth control options, pregnancy testing, 
and emergency contraception.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-23 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
 
BPS High Schools shall provide access to free condoms with 
appropriate reproductive health counseling for students. Each 
high school (grades 9-12) will have a Condom Accessibility Team 
(CAT) which will consist of a minimum of at least three school 
staff members. Condoms will be made available through the 
CAT at each high school. Condoms will also be accessible at 
some schools from school-based health centers and the Boston 
Public Health Commission’s (BPHC) Health Resource Centers 
(HRCs). Parents and caregivers may exempt their students from 
receiving condoms from the BPS CAT by notifying the school 
when they complete the family information forms at the 
beginning of the school year. This condom opt-out does not 
apply to other confidential health services.  
 
Under this policy, the Office of Health Services, along with the 
Office of Health and Wellness, is charged with enacting systems 
and practices to ensure that all students have access to key 
resources and services that are developmentally appropriate and 
support sexual and reproductive health in a safe and supportive 
environment.  
BPS high schools have three possible venues for the delivery of 
sexual health services: 1) through BPS CAT members; 2) school-
based health centers run by BPHC or neighborhood health 
centers that provide medical, reproductive, and mental health 
services, including STI/pregnancy testing, options counseling, 
access to contraceptives/condoms, treatment for STIs, and 
comprehensive routine health care; and 3) school-based health 
resource centers (HRCs) overseen by the Boston Public Health 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-23 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
 
Commission, which provide individual counseling, condom 
access, and STI testing and treatment for gonorrhea and 
chlamydia, where available. Annually, all BPS CAT members must 
participate in appropriate training related to the condom 
accessibility program.  
The following chart summarizes the services available and 
staffing model for each location. 
 
Please note:  
Under Massachusetts Law (Mass.Gen.Laws Ch.111, Section 24E) 
adolescents may seek and consent to confidential family planning 
services without parental notification. Family planning services include 
testing and treatment for sexually transmitted infections and HIV, all 
birth control options, pregnancy testing, and emergency 
contraception.  
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-23 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
 
 
Location 
School-based 
Health Centers 
Run by BPHC 
School-based Health 
Centers   Run by 
Community Health 
Centers 
Health Resource 
Centers * 
BPS High School  
CAT 
 
 
Services 
 
A clinical setting 
offering routine 
health care and 
acute care 
services, 
including mental 
health 
counseling and  
sexual & 
reproductive 
health care. 
A clinical setting 
offering routine 
health care and 
acute care services, 
including mental 
health counseling 
and sexual  
reproductive health 
care.  
Classroom sexual 
health 
education; 1:1 
education; 
condom 
availability; 
 
STI screening, 
treatment and 
referral, where 
available. 
Free internal and 
external condoms, 
oral dams, lubricant, 
and educational 
materials  to 
students not opted 
out of the program 
as these products 
are available.  
 
Confidential sexual 
health referrals 
made available to 
any students in need 
of sexual health care.  
 
*a barrier method 
that reduces the risk 
of STIs 
**lubricants increase 
the effectiveness of 
condoms, reducing 
breakage. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-23 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
 
 
 
Staffing 
Staffed by:  
● 
Nurse 
Practitioner  
● 
Mental 
Health 
Clinician  
● 
Health 
Educator  
● 
Health 
Coordinator 
● 
Admin 
Assistant 
Staffed by:  
Nurse Practitioners 
or Physician 
Assistants   
A team of two 
Health Educators 
assigned to 2 
high schools 
A minimum of 
three* trained school 
staff members. 
 
*Schools are 
encouraged to add 
more CAT members 
to increase access 
points within the 
school. Each 
additional member 
must complete CAT 
training. It is 
important that 
students receive 
supplies from 
trusted, caring 
adults. This may 
include the school 
nurse, health 
teachers, trained 
teachers of sexual 
health, social 
workers, school 
counselors, family 
liaisons, and/or other 
staff able to 
complete the 
training. 
 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-23 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION 
The implementation of condom accessibility will be directed by 
the Office of Health & Wellness (OHW), with support from and 
integration with the Office of Health Services at both the central 
and individual school levels. 
 
SCHOOL-BASED IMPLEMENTATION 
Each high school serving students in grades 9-12 will have a 
Condom Accessibility Team (CAT) which will consist of at least 
three school staff members. Schools are encouraged to add 
additional interested staff to the CAT. The CAT shall meet at least 
biannually to oversee its responsibilities and report back to the 
Wellness Council. 
 
 Condom Accessibility Team responsibilities: 
● Participate in CAT training organized and led by the Office of 
Health and Wellness 
● All parents and caregivers will be notified of the policy in the 
Guide to the BPS for Students & Families and have the option 
to opt their student out of the condom accessibility program 
by informing the student’s school. Additional communications 
to notify parents and caregivers through the school’s 
preferred communication channels is also recommended.  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-23 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
 
● Distribute communication information provided by the Office 
of Health and Wellness, such as brochures, posters, stickers, 
etc. that outline the Condom Accessibility program  
● Post information advertising who the CAT members are so 
that students are aware of this program and know who and 
where to locate CAT members in the school 
● Store condoms in secure, appropriate storage that does not 
experience extreme low or high temperatures to preserve 
effectiveness  
● Ensure that the school wellness council is updated on CAT 
functionality in the school 
● Advocate for all students to receive the BPS Comprehensive 
Sexual Health Education Program 
● Provide CAT team member names to the Office of Health and 
Wellness annually and add any new team members 
throughout the year 
● Document referrals and provide tracking as outlined in the 
training 
● Ensure that student confidentiality is maintained as per 
Massachusetts State Law 
● Ensure that parental/caregiver opt-out is clearly and 
confidently documented in the nurse electronic health record 
(SNAP) and communicated to all CAT members and other 
appropriate staff, including HRC staff involved in condom 
accessibility 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-23 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
 
● Please note: CAT members are required to file a 51a only when 
there is reasonable suspicion of physical or emotional harm by 
abuse, not based solely on the age of the student.  
 
DISTRICT-BASED IMPLEMENTATION  
Office of Health Services responsibilities:  
● Align the condom accessibility process with the overall Health 
Services action plan 
● In partnership with OHW, monitor referral tracking data 
within SNAP and assess district capacity to implement the 
condom accessibility program 
● Promote and complete CAT training   
● Partner with OHW instructional coaches to review 
questions/concerns brought forward during the CAT training 
● Promote the sexual health services referral resource 211 Help 
Steps at https://www.helpsteps.com/#/  
● Coordinate and communicate with adolescent community 
sexual health programming, including school-based health 
centers 
 
Office of Health and Wellness responsibilities: 
● Include the condom accessibility process in overall wellness 
action planning.  


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-23 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
 
● Review and approve all reproductive health materials that are 
to be distributed in the schools by CAT members, including 
materials donated by community partners. All community 
organizations interested in donating condoms and other 
materials should contact the Office of Health and Wellness 
before delivering materials to the schools. 
● Oversee ordering and storing of condoms for the district and 
distribution to schools. 
● Coordinate and communicate with adolescent community 
sexual health programming including school-based health 
centers and Health Resource Centers. 
● Collaborate with the Office of Health Services to provide 
training, marketing materials, and implementation tools to 
schools and technical assistance. 
● Provide updates and promotions for the BPS sexual health 
services referral guide (Y2Connect). 
● In partnership with Health Services, monitor referral tracking 
data, providing all high schools a system for tracking and 
reporting, and assess the district capacity to implement the 
condom accessibility program. 
 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-23 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Month 
Activity 
August  
● Parental and Caregiver Opt-out information 
included in Family Handbook 
● Parents and caregivers who do not want their 
student to receive condoms at school should 
email or submit in writing their intentions to the 
school principal and include the school nurse(s) 
in this communication.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent   
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SHS-04 
Version 01 
 
 
 
INFECTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL IN  
SCHOOL SETTINGS  
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
Schools can minimize the risk of disease transmission through 
student and staff awareness and simple infection control 
practices at the school and classroom level. 
MODES OF TRANSMISSION 
Diseases have different modes of transmission. Diseases can be 
spread through direct contact, indirect contact, droplet, or 
airborne transmission. The following guidelines minimize the 
risks for all modes of transmission.  
The single most important step in preventing exposure to and 
transmission of any infection is anticipating contact with 
infectious materials in routine as well as emergency situations. 
Based on the type of possible contact, the responder should be 
prepared to use the appropriate precautions and techniques 
prior to providing care. Diligent and proper hand washing, the 
use of barriers, appropriate disposal of waste products and 
needles, and proper decontamination measures will enhance 
protection of students and staff. 
 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 2 of 14 
 
 
 
UNIVERSAL (STANDARD) PRECAUTIONS 
The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) have long recommended 
"universal blood and body-fluid precautions" to prevent 
transmission of hepatitis B, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), 
and other infections, as well as to decrease the risk for exposure 
to responders and students. As it is not possible to identify all 
infected individuals, these precautions must be used with every 
student. Universal precautions pertain to all blood and body 
fluids. For bloodborne infections, these precautions do not apply 
to other body fluids and material, such as saliva, sputum, feces, 
tears, nasal secretions, vomitus, and urine, unless blood is visible 
in the materials. However, these other fluids and body wastes can 
be sources of other infections and should be handled as if they 
are infectious, utilizing the same precautions. This is the basis of 
standard precautions to be used with all body fluids, blood, and 
other potentially infectious material. 
TRANSMISSION BASED PRECAUTIONS 
The CDC has recommended “transmission-based precautions” as 
the second tier of basic infection control, to be used in addition to 
standard precautions for individuals who may be infected or 
colonized with certain infectious agents for which additional 
precautions are needed to prevent infection transmission.  
Contact Precautions 
Use contact precautions for those with known or suspected 
infections that represent an increased risk for contact 
transmission. Proper personal protective equipment (PPE) 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 3 of 14 
 
 
 
includes the use of gloves and gown for all interactions that may 
involve contact with the student or the student’s environment.  
Droplet Precautions 
Use droplet precautions for students known or suspected to be 
infected with pathogens transmitted by respiratory droplets 
generated by coughing, sneezing, or talking. Proper personal 
protective equipment (PPE) includes the use of masks, both for 
the patient and school nurse, during all interactions. 
Airborne Precautions 
Use airborne precautions for those individuals known or 
suspected to be infected with pathogens transmitted by the 
airborne route (e.g., COVID-19, tuberculosis, measles, chickenpox, 
disseminated herpes zoster). Proper PPE includes a fit-tested, 
NIOSH-approved N95 or higher level of respiratory protection for 
healthcare personnel and a mask on the patient.  
RESPIRATORY HYGIENE 
In addition to spread by bodily fluids, infections can be spread by 
respiratory droplets that are generated when people sneeze, 
cough, laugh, or exhale. Respiratory hygiene is a term adopted by 
the CDC and Massachusetts Department of Public Health 
(MDPH) to describe measures that can be taken to decrease the 
risk for spreading respiratory illnesses by droplet and airborne 
transmission. A universal “respiratory hygiene/cough etiquette” 
policy includes: 
• Covering the mouth and nose with a tissue when coughing 
or sneezing 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 4 of 14 
 
 
 
• Disposing of used tissues in a wastebasket 
• Practicing hand hygiene (washing) often 
• Coughing or sneezing into elbow 
HAND WASHING 
Proper hand washing is crucial to preventing the spread of 
infection. Use of running water, lathering with soap, and using 
friction to clean all surfaces of the hands are key. Rinse well with 
running water and dry hands with paper towels. If soap and 
water are unavailable, hand sanitizer may be used. 
• Hands should be washed before physical contact with 
students and after the contact is completed. 
• Hands should be washed after contact with any used 
equipment. If hands (or other skin) become soiled with 
blood or body fluids, they should be washed immediately 
before touching anything else.  
• Hands should be washed whether gloves are worn or not 
and after gloves are removed. 
• Textured jewelry on the hands or wrists (such as rings and 
stones) should be removed prior to washing and kept off 
until completion of the care procedure and hands are 
rewashed. 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 5 of 14 
 
 
 
BARRIER PROTECTION 
Barriers include disposable gloves, protective eyewear, and gown. 
The use of a barrier is intended to reduce the risk for contact with 
blood and body fluids for the caregiver, as well as to control the 
spread of infectious agents from student to student. It is essential 
that appropriate barriers be used when contact with potentially 
infectious material is possible. Gloves should be worn when direct 
care of the student may involve contact with blood and body 
fluids, as well for contact with urine, feces, and respiratory 
secretions. Gloves should be disposed of after each use and not 
reused. 
Gloves should be worn: 
• When changing a diaper or catheterizing a student 
• When changing dressings or sanitary napkins 
• When providing mouth, nose, or tracheal care 
• If the caregiver has broken skin on the hands (even around 
the nails) 
• When cleaning up spills of blood (e.g., nosebleeds), body 
fluids and wastes, and soiled supplies 
Gowns or aprons may be worn to protect the caregiver's clothing 
if spattering of body fluids is possible. The apron or gown should 
be laundered or disposed of after each care session and should 
not be reused. 
In addition, protective eye wear and masks should be worn if 
splashing of body fluids is likely to occur (such as mouth 
suctioning or care of a student who is coughing). 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 6 of 14 
 
 
 
Chux or other waterproof barriers should be used to cover any 
work surface if drainage or splashing with blood or body fluids 
are possible. The barrier should be disposed of after each care 
session and should not be reused. 
DISPOSAL OF WASTE 
All used or contaminated supplies (including gloves and other 
barriers) except for syringes, needles, and other sharp 
implements should be placed in a plastic bag which is then 
sealed. This bag should be placed in a second plastic bag, which 
is also sealed. The double-bagged waste can then be thrown in 
the garbage, out of the reach of children or animals. Bodily 
wastes such as urine, vomitus, or feces should be disposed of in 
the toilet. 
Needles, syringes, and other sharp objects should be immediately 
placed in FDA-cleared sharps disposal containers. To reduce the 
risk of an accidental needle stick or cut, needles should not be 
recapped, bent, or removed from the syringe before disposal. 
Once it is full, the container should be sealed and brought to 
Health Services central administration for disposal in a large 
biohazard container. Health Services will arrange for pickup by a 
biohazard waste disposal company for proper disposal at least 
annually. 
CLEANUP PROCEDURES 
Spills of blood and body fluids that are covered under standard 
precautions should be cleaned up immediately.  
   


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 7 of 14 
 
 
 
The CDC method of clean-up is as follows: 
• Wear gloves. 
• Mop up the spill with paper towels or other absorbent 
material. 
• Using a solution of one-part household bleach (sodium 
hypochlorite) in ten parts of water; wash the area well. 
• Dispose of gloves, soiled towels, and other waste in a sealed 
double plastic bag in the garbage as outlined above. 
Routine environmental clean-up procedures for facilities (such as 
the health room and bathrooms) does not require any 
modification unless contamination with blood or body fluids 
should occur. If so, the area should be decontaminated using the 
procedure outlined above. Regular cleaning of surfaces which are 
not visibly contaminated with potentially infectious material, 
such as toilet seats and tabletops, can be done with the standard 
cleaning and removal of obvious soil.  
LAUNDRY PROCEDURES 
Whenever possible, disposable barriers should be used if 
contamination with body fluids or blood is possible. If sheets, 
towels, or clothing become soiled, they should be handled as 
little as possible. Wash with hot water and detergent for at least 
25 minutes. Cool water washing is also acceptable if an 
appropriate detergent is used for the water temperature. 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 8 of 14 
 
 
 
PREGNANT WOMEN 
Pregnant women are at no higher risk for infection than other 
care-providers as long as appropriate precautions are observed. 
However, due to the possibility of in-utero transmission of viral 
infections such as cytomegalovirus (CMV) or HIV, as well as the 
potential for adverse outcomes with certain infections, pregnant 
women should be especially careful to observe standard 
precautions. 
GENERAL INFECTION CONTROL PROCEDURES 
The purpose of the procedures outlined herein is to establish 
basic guidelines to address the role of staff in all incidents 
requiring concern about infection control. Such incidents may 
include, but not be limited to, a bleeding nose, sneezing, 
coughing, uncontrollable urinating, and sudden bowel 
movement. 
Head of school/principal shall: 
• Ensure that all staff are familiar with this policy and that the 
provisions of this policy are implemented. 
Classroom teacher shall: 
• Encourage the use of class wide respiratory hygiene, 
especially during flu season and other respiratory illness 
upticks. 
• Reassure and calm students involved in hygiene 
emergencies. 
• Notify the school nurse of any infectious disease concerns. 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 9 of 14 
 
 
 
• Notify custodians of infection control needs 
School nurse shall: 
• Review infection control procedures annually at the 
beginning of the school year with classroom staff. 
• Assist the classroom staff in developing hygiene plans 
appropriate for the classroom as well as individual students. 
• Notify Health Services of cases and possible clusters. 
School custodian shall: 
• Refer to and follow the steps identified in Superintendent 
Circular FMT-19 for cleaning related to possible infectious 
bodily fluids.  
 BITE EMERGENCY PROCEDURES 
The purpose of the procedures outlined herein is to establish 
basic guidelines intended to assist students and staff who have 
encountered a human or animal bite that breaks the skin. 
Background information for human bites: 
Biting is very common among young children but usually does 
not lead to any serious infectious disease concerns. If the skin is 
punctured or broken, bacteria may be introduced into the wound 
that can lead to blood-borne infection which needs to be treated 
by a healthcare professional. Blood-borne infection could be of 
concern if the biter breaks the skin and blood is drawn into the 
biter’s mouth or if the biter has bleeding gums or mouth sores. 
Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C and HIV are some pathogens of concern 
although the risk of transmission of these viruses is very low in 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 10 of 14 
 
 
 
school settings. For HIV, there have not been any reported cases 
of transmission in school settings.  
The “biter” might be considered at higher risk than the “bitee” 
due to the exposure to the blood from the wound if the skin is 
broken. Each human bite represents a unique set of 
circumstances and requires an individualized response. In most 
biting episodes there are no communicable disease extenuating 
circumstances, and the episodes are treated with standard 
precautions. There is a heightened sense of urgency when one of 
the children has a communicable disease. The school nurse is 
responsible for guiding the response, working with the 
headmaster/principal, and ensuring that confidentiality is 
maintained.  
Background information for animal bites: 
Animal bites are common since children can behave 
unpredictably and animals have normal protective instincts. An 
animal bite that breaks or punctures the skin will require 
immediate medical attention due to the risk of bacterial and viral 
infection. The longer the animal’s mouth germs stay in the 
wound, the greater the risk of potential infection that will require 
antibiotics.  
Animals can also transmit rabies, a very serious viral infection 
that infects the nervous system. Although any mammal bite can 
transmit rabies, the bites of some wild animals (e.g., bats, 
raccoons, skunks, foxes, coyotes) and some stray and 
unvaccinated pet dogs and cats are of greatest concern. Wild 
animals should not be kept or allowed to visit schools. All 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 11 of 14 
 
 
 
suspected animal bites should be promptly reported to public 
health authorities by Health Services.  
In the event of an animal or human bite that breaks the skin: 
Principal/head of school shall: 
• Ensure that all staff are familiar with this policy and that the 
provisions of this policy are implemented. 
Classroom teacher shall: 
• Reassure and calm the students. 
• Employ standard precautions in evaluating the bite. 
• Notify the school nurse immediately. 
• Have the student wash the area with soap and water 
immediately. 
• Report action taken to the headmaster/principal. 
For human bites, school nurse shall: 
• Provide first aid to the child who was bitten by washing any 
broken skin and applying a cold compress to any bruise. 
• Review known medical information of both the “biter” and 
the “bitee.” If there is a known communicable disease issue, 
the nurse must consult with Health Services administration 
for more specific guidance. Confidentiality must be 
respected throughout the consultation. 
• Contact the student's parent/guardian to report the incident 
and recommend next steps. 
• Refer both the “biter” and “bitee” to their primary care 
provider for further guidance. This may include any or all the 
following: risk counseling; hepatitis and HIV testing; 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 12 of 14 
 
 
 
prophylaxis. The treatment approach is at the discretion of 
the primary care provider and the family. 
• Notify Health Services prior to calling the families if there is a 
known communicable disease issue with one or both 
students. 
• Be a liaison to the primary care provider as requested by the 
parent and within the boundaries of confidentiality. 
• Document the incident in SNAP for students. If a staff 
member was involved, the staff member must file a Report 
of Injury Form [see Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP07, 
Worker’s Compensation Procedures] within 7 days. 
For animal bites, school nurse shall: 
• Immediately provide first aid to the child who was bitten by 
washing any broken skin and applying a cold compress to 
any bruise. 
• Notify Health Services prior to calling parent/guardian. An 
animal bite that breaks or punctures the skin needs 
immediate wound care to reduce the risk of infection. All 
animal bites should be reported within 24 hours. 
• Contact the student's parent/guardian to report the incident 
and recommend next steps. 
• Refer the student to their primary care provider for further 
guidance. The treatment approach is at the discretion of the 
primary care provider and the family. 
• Be a liaison to the primary care provider as requested by the 
parent and within the boundaries of confidentiality. 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 13 of 14 
 
 
 
EMPLOYEE NEEDLESTICK MANAGEMENT 
When a needlestick occurs: 
•  Gently bleed the area, wash, and immediately flush with 
soap and water. 
• The employee who has had the needle stick should call their 
primary care provider. 
• If the risk assessment of the primary care provider and/or 
school nurse is that the needle stick represents an exposure 
to blood or body fluids, it is advisable that the employee 
seek management at an emergency department that can 
provide the latest in prophylactic management; the 
employee’s primary care provider will be able to assist with 
this. 
• Health Services should be notified for further guidance. 
• The employee should complete an incident report and 
Worker’s Compensation form after the situation has been 
stabilized. 
LIST OF TERMS USED ABOVE 
Blood-borne infection: infectious germs present in blood that can 
cause disease in humans.  
Communicable disease: an illness caused by an infectious agent 
or its toxins that occurs through the direct or indirect 
transmission of the infectious agent or its products from an 
infected individual or via an animal to a susceptible animal or 
human host. 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 14 of 14 
 
 
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
September 2024  
All staff should have universal precaution 
review by school nurse 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Fax: 
617-635-7937 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SHS-13 
Version 01 
 
 
 
TRANSPORTATION, MEDICAL ACCOMMODATION  
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
 
Some students may be eligible for transportation 
accommodation based on medical needs. The following 
guidelines and processes refer to transportation for student 
medical indications only. Transportation accommodations for 
medical needs do not include transportation accommodations 
written into an Individualized Education Program (IEP). 
BACKGROUND 
Medical transportation is warranted when a student’s illness, 
managed by a health care professional, requires the assistance of 
transportation as an accommodation to enable the student to 
attend school. Transportation accommodations for medical 
needs should not substitute for treatment of specific medical 
conditions. The school, through the Student Support Team, is 
encouraged to explore creative solutions to assist these families 
with extraordinary needs. Children with chronic medical 
conditions that cannot be remediated by medication or therapy 
may be granted renewal each year. Renewal is collaboratively 
determined by the school nurse and central office staff. Schools 
will be notified in the spring to begin the transportation renewal 
process. No student should be considered “renewed” until 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-13 
Page 2 of 11 
 
 
 
receiving written notification that will be sent according to the 
Transportation Office policy.  
POLICY IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES 
Parent/Guardian Role: 
• Inform the school nurse of medical diagnosis and provide 
supporting medical documentation that may require 
transportation as an accommodation. 
• Communicate with the school nurse and their child’s health 
care provider regarding the need for medical transportation. 
• All participants in the process may seek further assistance 
by contacting Health Services at 617-635-6788 or the 
Department of Transportation at 617-635-9520. 
School Principal/Head of School Role: 
• Review, discuss, and approve each case with the Student 
Support Team and/or school nurse. 
• Designate a member of the Student Support Team to 
collaborate with the school nurse to inform 
parents/guardians of eligibility determination. 
• All participants in the process may seek further assistance 
by contacting Health Services at 617-635-6788 or the 
Department of Transportation at 617-635-9520. 
School Nurse Role: 
• Provide parents/guardians with a release of medical 
information form to be signed to obtain consent to speak 
with the student’s licensed health care provider. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-13 
Page 3 of 11 
 
 
 
• Contact the licensed healthcare provider to inform them of 
the BPS transportation accommodation policy, discuss the 
request submitted by the parent/guardian, and share 
clinical observations related to the child’s medical condition.  
• Present the case to the Student Support Team, including 
notes taken during discussions with the parent/guardian 
and licensed health care provider to determine the 
appropriate accommodations, if any. 
• Document all relevant and objective information related to 
transportation in the student’s electronic health record. 
• If the school nurse does not believe transportation is 
warranted based on the above criteria, but any other 
participant in the process disagrees, the case is referred to 
School Health Services for further clarification and 
resolution. 
Student Support Team Role: 
• Discuss medical transportation request cases as referred by 
the school nurse. 
• Each request should be considered individually, and other 
options must be reviewed prior to authorization of medical 
transportation. If additional support is needed, the Student 
Support Team may make referrals for 504 or special 
education concerns. 
• All participants in the process may seek further assistance 
by contacting Health Services at 617-635-6788 or the 
Department of Transportation at 617-635-9520. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-13 
Page 4 of 11 
 
 
 
Coordinator of Special Education (COSE) Role: 
• If a student is eligible for a 504 accommodation plan (or is 
being evaluated for a 504 accommodation plan), the team 
shall discuss eligibility for transportation. 
• If a student already has an IEP (or is being evaluated) and 
transportation may be necessary for the medical condition 
(but not necessarily the area of educational disability), the 
team shall consider transportation needs. As part of this 
consideration, the team shall include the school nurse. If 
special transportation is found to be necessary for the 
student to benefit from special education services and make 
meaningful educational progress, it can be added to the IEP. 
• If a student is referred for consideration for a 504 
accommodation plan and/or special education and related 
services, the COSE will process the request for 
transportation as appropriate. 
• All participants in the process may seek further assistance 
by contacting Health Services at 617-635-6788 or the 
Department of Transportation at 617-635-9520. 
School Health Services Role: 
• A member of the Health Services administrative team will 
be available to discuss any request for transportation as an 
accommodation for medical needs.  
• School Health Services will consult with any party involved 
in the transportation as an accommodation for the medical 
needs process regarding the eligibility determination. 
• In some cases, School Health Services may overturn the 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-13 
Page 5 of 11 
 
 
 
initial determination or provide recommendations for 
alternative accommodations to support the student’s needs. 
Department of Transportation Role: 
• After approval, the parent/guardian of the student will be 
notified by mail of transportation specifics (time of pick-
up/drop-off/bus numbers/effective date). School staff may 
access route information via Aspen. 
• Collaborate with School Health Services regarding the 
medical transportation renewal process. 
• Transportation requests for students who are healthy, but 
whose parents or guardians are ill, will not be approved.  
 
ELIGIBILITY DETERMINATION 
A student determined to be eligible: 
• The school nurse will fill out the Request for Medical 
Transportation form provided below and submit it to 
school-based leadership for final approval; the signed form 
will be sent via email to the school’s Transportation Officer 
within the Department of Transportation by the school 
leader and/or school transportation coordinator. 
• Once approved, the parent/guardian of the student will be 
notified by mail of transportation specifics (time of pick-
up/drop-off/bus numbers/effective date). School staff may 
access route information via Aspen. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-13 
Page 6 of 11 
 
 
 
A student determined NOT eligible: 
• The parent/guardian will be notified by the principal 
designee in collaboration with the school nurse. 
• All participants in the process may seek further assistance 
by contacting Health Services at 617-635-6788 or the 
Department of Transportation at 617-635-9520. 
 
SPECIFIC GUIDELINES 
Asthma: Transportation as an accommodation for asthma is 
reserved for severe asthmatics that are adhering to a treatment 
plan, have a rescue inhaler at school, and have an Asthma Action 
Plan on file with the school nurse. If asthma impacts a student’s 
ability to walk to a school bus or MBTA stop, further medical 
evaluation and treatment may be necessary and should be 
discussed with the child’s health care provider. Even the most 
compliant students with asthma may need medical 
transportation during the cold winter months. Mild, episodic 
asthmatic students on intermittent medications do not qualify 
for medical transportation. 
Sickle Cell: Please refer to Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25. 
Ambulation: Students with conditions that significantly affect 
ambulation, such as leg braces, crutches, lower extremity 
fractures, or amputations may be eligible for transportation as an 
accommodation. Students who can ambulate and fully 
participate in the school program should not be authorized for 
medical transportation.  
Seizure Disorder: Students experiencing current, intermittent 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-13 
Page 7 of 11 
 
 
 
seizure activity are eligible for transportation accommodation 
until stabilized. In general, if seizures are well controlled, medical 
transportation will not be provided. 
Emotional/Behavioral Problems:  Children with emotional and/or 
behavioral issues which impact their transportation to or from 
school should be discussed at the Student Support Team 
meeting before any referral is made for this type of 
transportation accommodation. ADHD, depression/anxiety, 
impulsivity, and other behavioral issues have an impact on 
teaching and learning as well as school access. Behavioral 
modification and other modalities may be more beneficial to the 
child’s overall functioning than just transportation alone. The 
school nurse will gather the medically relevant information for 
the team. 
Other: Neuromuscular disorders, cardiac disease, and other 
medical conditions should be reviewed on an individual basis; 
consult with School Health Services as needed. 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-13 
Page 8 of 11 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-13 
Page 9 of 11 
 
 
 
REQUEST FOR TRANSPORTATION ACCOMMODATION,  
MEDICAL NEEDS 
(For school system use only) 
Student Name _________________________Student ID # ____________  
School_ _________________________________________________________  
Hours: _____________________________ 
Transportation will only be provided for the official hours of the 
school. 
School Nurse (please print) ______________________________________  
Principal/Head of School (please print) __________________________  
Does the student currently receive any kind of transportation 
from Boston Public Schools?   Yes          No 
If yes, please describe why the additional accommodation is 
being requested. ________________________________________________  
 _________________________________________________________________  
Does the student currently receive services related to a 504 or 
IEP?   Yes          No 
If yes, please discuss adding this accommodation to the student’s 
current educational plan, instead of submitting the request in 
this manner. Call Health Services for additional information and 
support. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-13 
Page 10 of 11 
 
 
 
MEDICAL CERTIFICATION: 
Reason for request: ______________________________________________  
 _________________________________________________________________  
Healthcare Provider/ Clinic Name: _______________________________  
Is all relevant data documented in the student’s electronic health 
record?       Yes           No 
 
DURATION OF MEDICAL TRANSPORTATION: Any 
accommodation lasting longer than 6-8 weeks will be reviewed 
by School Health Services in collaboration with the BPS 
Department of Transportation. 
 Wheelchair van           #weeks _________   
 Cold winter months     School year 
 
AUTHORIZATION: 
Date the request was submitted to school nurse: ________________  
Date the request was discussed at SST meeting: ________________  
Principal/head of school signature ______________________________  
Date: _______________________________ 
School nurse signature __________________________________________  


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-13 
Page 11 of 11 
 
 
 
Date: _______________________________ 
Name of Transportation Officer: _________________________________   
Date faxed/emailed to Transportation Officer:  ___________________  
 
***************** 
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION ONLY  
Date processed by Transportation Unit: _________________________  


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SHS-01 
Version 01 
 
DRUG AND ALCOHOL MISUSE AND HARM REDUCTION – 
UPDATE ON PROCEDURES 
 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
EDUCATION OF STUDENTS IN THE PREVENTION OF ALCOHOL, 
MARIJUANA, TOBACCO AND OTHER DRUG DEPENDENCY 
 
While substance misuse prevention and harm reduction should 
be a part of a comprehensive health education program, certain 
curricula should be used to complement and supplement health 
education curriculum materials for grades K-12. Substance 
misuse prevention and harm reduction may also be integrated 
into reading/language arts, social studies, and science classes. 
The National Health Education Standards and performance 
expectations provide the functional health knowledge, beliefs, 
and skills necessary for students to adopt and maintain healthy 
behaviors, reduce risk behaviors associated with substance 
misuse, achieve health literacy, and enhance health outcomes. 
 
 
 
The Boston Public Schools scope and sequence for Health 
Education recommends the following substance prevention 
curriculum, including: 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-01 
Page 2 of 9 
 
• CATCH Curriculum Grades K-6: Tobacco, Alcohol and Other 
Drug Prevention (contact the Office of Health and Wellness 
for access); 
• Essential Health Skills for Middle Schools & High Schools, G-
W Publisher: Tobacco, Alcohol and Other Drug Prevention 
(contact the Office of Health and Wellness for access); 
• Stanford University K-12, Tobacco Prevention Toolkit, which 
includes e-cigarette use of any type, including nicotine, 
cannabis/THC, and/or non-nicotine products; 
• Stanford University Grades 6-12, Cannabis Awareness and 
Prevention Toolkit.  
  
 
EARLY IDENTIFICATION AND INTERVENTION 
Even though a student may not possess or use substances at 
school, they may still have serious problems involving alcohol or 
drugs that demand the attention and assistance of school 
personnel. School nurses, school counselors and social 
workersphave been trainedin identification and the  medical 
effects of substance use or addiction. The District will continue to 
provide in-service programs and workshops, to craise staff 
awareness, understand the protocols and procedures in place 
when dealing with a student who is suspected of using or has 
been identified as needing support regarding substance abuse. 
School staff should be alert to those symptoms in students which 
may indicate problems with substance abuse and follow the 
protocols outlined in this circular. 
These symptoms may include one or more of the following: 
abrupt change in mood or attitude; sudden decline in attendance 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-01 
Page 3 of 9 
 
or performance in school; sudden resistance to discipline; 
impaired relationships with family or friends; drowsiness or 
inattention to discussion or surroundings; weight loss; inattention 
to dress; unusual flare-ups of temper; stealing; heightened 
secrecy about actions or possessions; and association with new 
friends, especially with individuals known to be substance users. 
 
SCREENING 
Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) 
focuses on prevention, early detection, risk assessment, brief 
counseling and referral for assessment that can be utilized in the 
school setting.  This tool is frequently used by the school nurse to 
assess the acuity of the problem and to develop next steps. Use 
of a validated screening tool will enable BPS school teams to 
detect risk for substance use related problems and brief 
intervention strategies will help to address these concerns at an 
early stage in adolescents. 
In March 2016, the Massachusetts Legislature enacted an Act 
relative to Substance Use, Treatment, Education and Prevention 
(STEP Act), which outlines the requirements for public schools in 
the Commonwealth to engage in substance use screening and 
education. Legislation can be found at 
https://malegislature.gov/Laws/SessionLaws/Acts/2016/Chapter52 
(see Sections 15, 63, 64, 66). 
BPS has implemented the use of the approved and validated 
CRAFFT-II screening tool that is approved by the Massachusetts 
Department of Public Health (DPH) and Department of 
Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE). Per legislation, 
SBIRT screening will be provided annually to students in grades 7 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-01 
Page 4 of 9 
 
and 9. Parents/guardians must be notified about the screening 
prior to the start of the year and must be given the option to opt 
out in writing. Please Refer to SBIRT in Schools. Staff conducting 
the SBIRT screening must complete a mandatory training 
through the MA Department of Public Health/BU Shield. 
SBIRT in Schools Resource Toolkit 
 
COUNSELING/REFERRAL 
When it is suspected that a student is either using or abusing 
marijuana, alcohol or other drugs, or there are strong indications 
that such is the case, the student should be referred to the school 
nurse for a wellness check, the school social worker and the 
parent/guardian/caregiver shall be notified.  The student may be 
referred to the Student Support Team(SST) and/or the school 
administrator for a referral to the voluntary Substance Use 
Program (SUP) at Succeed Boston.  The Substance Use Program 
(SUP) is a voluntary program for students whose use of drugs or 
alcohol is of concern. The program provides education and 
counseling about the effects of drugs, alcohol, and vaping and 
provides students with alternative ways to deal with stress. 
Referral for outside services will be provided as needed. The 
student may participate in the voluntary intensive program for 
up to five days and upon discharge will be referred to appropriate 
outside services.  Students may be referred to the Student 
Support Team (SST) by teachers or by any other school staff 
member. Students may self-refer because of a problem with 
substance abuse. The team should be prepared to assist the 
student by providing them with a source of early intervention in 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-01 
Page 5 of 9 
 
the form of individual or group counseling by a provider agency 
which serves the school or is available in the community.  
 
RE-ENTRY 
Follow-up is a crucial phase of a student's recovery after 
returning from treatment for substance abuse. An after-care 
program should be devised by school staff in collaboration with 
the facility which has provided treatment services. The plan 
should include a review of the student's school program with 
parents, guidance counselor, and case manager; placements in 
an appropriate class schedule; and follow-up meetings.   
 
REPORTING OF INCIDENTS RELATED TO DRUG/ALCOHOL USE 
1. 
All School Department personnel are under obligation to 
report to the principal, head of school, or other designated 
administrator any and all incidents or suspected incidents 
involving the use, possession, or distribution of any drug, 
alcoholic beverage, while they are under the authority of the 
Boston School Department. 
 
2. 
All School Department personnel are to understand that in 
the event they are subpoenaed to testify in a court of law or 
other proceeding, they are obligated to reveal any 
information pertaining to drug, alcohol, and weapons 
incidents, even if such information was given to them in 
confidence. 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-01 
Page 6 of 9 
 
3. 
All School personnel are to understand that they are 
prohibited from "making deals" with students whereby they 
agree not to notify law enforcement agencies of known or 
suspected illegal activities involving drug, alcohol, 
 
4. 
Each and every incident or suspected incident is to be 
reported immediately to the appropriate principal, head of 
school or designated administrator, in accordance with 
School Department policy and procedure. 
 
5. 
Students are considered to be under the authority of the 
Boston School Department when they are on School 
Department property, on School Department buses, at or 
near school bus stops, while on their way to or from school, 
or participating in school sponsored activities conducted off 
school grounds. 
 
6. 
Any student who is suspected of or who has admitted to 
being under the influence of drugs or alcohol must be 
immediately escorted to the office of the principal, head of 
school, or designated administrator. 
 
7. 
Students involved in incidents described in items 1, 5, and 6 
shall be considered in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 
94C (Controlled Substances Act), Chapter 138 (Alcoholic 
Liquors), Chapter 119 (Protection and Care of Children and 
Proceedings against Them), and Chapter 169-10 (Dangerous 
Weapons, Unlawfully Carrying). 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-01 
Page 7 of 9 
 
8. 
Use of drugs and/or alcohol is prohibited.Students deemed 
to be in violation of school rules after an investigation by the 
principal, head of school or designated administrator will be 
appropriately disciplined, but law enforcement and EMS 
assistance may be requested in cases where it is apparent 
that the student is engaging in disorderly or dangerous 
behavior.  
 
9. 
In some cases, if a student is found to be in possession of 
drugs, alcohol or weapons or to be under the influence of 
drugs or alcohol is to be considered in violation of 
Massachusetts General Law. In such cases the principal, 
head of school, or designated administrator is obligated to 
summon the Boston Police Department, which will assume 
responsibility for criminal prosecution in the event that such 
prosecution is warranted. 
 
10. 
In all such cases where students are found or suspected to 
be involved in any incident involving substance abuse, a 
safety specialist will take custody of any and all evidence 
including drugs and alcohol. 
 
11. 
The Department of Safety Services will coordinate record-
keeping functions. 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-01 
Page 8 of 9 
 
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES RELATING TO DRUG/ALCOHOL 
ABUSE 
 
1. 
Sections 7.7 .1 of the Code of Conduct requires that sale, 
distribution, or possession with intent to sell or distribute of 
any prescribed or non-prescribed controlled substances in 
school, on school grounds, or while under school jurisdiction 
may result in expulsion. 
 
2. 
Section 7.4.2 of the Code of Conduct allows for suspension, 
long term suspension, alternative program placement, or 
expulsion if a student is found in possession of any non-
prescribed controlled substance, narcotic drug, 
hallucinogenic drug, amphetamine, barbiturate, marijuana, 
alcoholic beverage, or intoxicant of any kind. 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent   


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-01 
Page 9 of 9 
 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SHS-25 
Version 01 
 
 
 
SICKLE CELL DISEASE POLICY AND IMPLEMENTATION  
 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
POLICY BACKGROUND  
BPS recognizes that a clear, comprehensive policy on Sickle Cell 
Disease (SCD) management in school can have an impact on 
academic achievement and support the general wellbeing of 
students with SCD.  
 
POLICY STATEMENT  
BPS acknowledges that SCD is a disability that substantially 
limits a major life activity, and qualifies students with SCD for a 
comprehensive evaluation and consideration of eligibility under 
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Section 504) to 
determine the services and accommodations they may need to 
attain a free appropriate public education. As part of BPS’s 
commitment to maintaining an educational environment that is 
welcoming, inclusive, and encouraging, such that all students are 
able to flourish, all schools must follow established protocols and 
procedures for addressing the needs of children with SCD and 
regularly evaluate the implementation of these plans.  
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 2 of 12 
 
 
 
 
BPS acknowledges that the successful implementation of this 
policy at the district and school levels relies on fostering and 
maintaining a culture of awareness and acceptance regarding 
SCD through acknowledging the history of SCD and the unique 
challenges students with SCD face. With this in mind, BPS 
recognizes that:  
● People with SCD have long faced harmful stigmas, many 
with racially charged origins.  
● People with SCD are often challenged about the seriousness 
of their disease or even its existence.  
● Students with SCD have long experienced barriers to their 
health and success at school.  
 
IMPLEMENTATION IN BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS  
Sickle Cell Disease Basics  
SCD refers to a group of genetic blood disorders. It affects 
individuals of all races and ethnicities, but in the United States it 
is especially prevalent among African Americans and Hispanics. 
Complications include but are not limited to severe anemia, 
susceptibility to infections, insomnia, jaundice, frequent 
urination, dehydration, chronic pain, and episodes of extreme, 
debilitating pain. Pain episodes (also known as “crises”) can cause 
tissue and organ damage, lead to hospitalizations, and have life-
threatening consequences. People with SCD are also at 
heightened risk for anxiety, depression, post-traumatic stress 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 3 of 12 
 
 
 
 
disorder, social isolation, delayed social development, visible 
strokes, and “silent strokes” that may go unnoticed but can affect 
learning abilities in the short and long terms. Pain episodes and 
other complications may be triggered by a wide variety of 
physical and psychological stressors.  
As a result of these complications and the side effects of 
medications, many children with SCD experience frequent 
absences and difficulty focusing or engaging as they usually do 
at school, particularly with regard to physical activities. On days 
free from harsher symptoms and side effects, many students 
with SCD still experience baseline symptoms and health 
vulnerabilities that require modifications to standard 
participation requirements.  
Additionally, the biology and history of SCD create the following 
unique challenges:  
● SCD pain is often “invisible.” People with SCD learn coping 
mechanisms (such as staying still and quiet) that may seem 
counterintuitive. SCD pain therefore often goes undetected 
by others, leading to challenges about the seriousness or 
existence of the pain.  
● Symptoms such as jaundice, short stature, and delayed 
social development, along with repeated absences, can 
make students with SCD targets of bullying and 
harassment.  
● Medications used to treat people with SCD, such as opioid 
pain medications and hydroxyurea (a chemotherapy drug 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 4 of 12 
 
 
 
 
that can also help some people with SCD), can cause serious 
and disruptive side effects and carry stigmas of their own.  
● Individuals with SCD have historically been stigmatized in 
the community, hospitals, schools, the armed services, and 
places of employment. Labeled a “Black disease,” SCD has 
historically been associated with claims of racial weakness 
and genetic inferiority.  
 
OVERVIEW – ADDRESSING NEEDS OF BPS STUDENTS WITH SCD  
A.  
CHILD FIND: Identification, Location, Immediate 
Accommodations & Evaluation  
 
1.  Identification and Location  
BPS acknowledges that, due to the stigmas noted above, many 
parents choose not to identify their child with SCD instead of 
seeking supportive services and accommodations for their 
children. To overcome this challenge, BPS utilizes multiple 
strategies as part of an outreach and public awareness campaign 
to raise awareness of SCD and its effects on learning to assure 
families that BPS is a willing partner to create a community of 
support, collaboration, and understanding around students with 
SCD. These strategies include but are not limited to: 
● Collaboration with local medical centers that treat 
children with SCD and leveraging these to develop 
strategies for identification and location (e.g., sharing 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 5 of 12 
 
 
 
 
outreach materials with clinics, providing “know your 
rights” materials for families in clinics that see students 
with SCD, meeting with medical providers to develop 
additional strategies etc.) 
● Ensuring that all communications are available in 
multiple languages and/or modes in order to be 
accessible to all families  
● Ensuring that the outreach and public awareness 
campaign includes outreach to preschools, early 
intervention providers and community support 
providers, who are likely to have students that are or 
will enroll in BPS (i.e. located in Greater Boston)  
● Additional strategies developed with input from the 
SCD Advisory Group  
 
Specific considerations regarding enrollment:  
Upon identifying a child with SCD at enrollment, BPS ensures 
proper placement in a school with appropriate health and related 
services. Given stigmas related to SCD, BPS gives special 
attention to ensuring the privacy of students with SCD. This 
includes appropriately limiting the scope of releases parents sign 
regarding disclosures of their child’s SCD status. Further, BPS 
ensures appropriate efforts are made to initiate and maintain 
connections between school health staff and students with SCD, 
their parents, and their medical teams upon enrollment of the 
student (or upon identification if after enrollment). This includes 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 6 of 12 
 
 
 
 
providing information to parents and school health staff and 
ensuring privacy rights are maintained.  
 
2.  Interim Services/Supports Pursuant to Section 504  
BPS acknowledges that, because SCD is a physical disability that 
substantially limits major life activities, students with SCD are 
entitled to certain accommodations upon identification and 
location to ensure their health, safety, and equal educational 
opportunities, pending the completion of a comprehensive 
evaluation. All rights and protections pursuant to Section 504, 
including procedural safeguards, are ensured upon identifying 
and locating students with SCD. BPS ensures that the interim 
accommodations implemented pursuant to Section 504 include 
the following:  
● Two sets of textbooks, one for school and the other for 
home  
● Unlimited bathroom access as needed  
● Unlimited access as needed to the school nurse or 
school health official  
● Unlimited access as needed to communicate with 
parent and/or physician if they are experiencing 
symptoms that are unfamiliar or are ones their 
physicians told them to contact them about if 
experienced 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 7 of 12 
 
 
 
 
● Unlimited water access as needed through access to a 
water bottle and water fountains  
● Time/permission to access medication (including 
prescribed opioids), as needed  
● Permission to wear a coat indoors whenever feeling 
cold and to stay indoors or be exempt from outdoor 
activities whenever it is too hot, too cold, or when air 
quality is poor  
● Permission to move away from indoor AC or heating 
units  
● Consideration for door-to-door transportation, except 
in the very limited circumstances where it would be 
impractical (e.g., student resides next door or across 
the street from the school building they attends) 
● Permission to access an elevator, if relevant, and to 
leave class early to get to the next one (or alternatively, 
extra time between classes)  
● Modified participation in gym class, based on student 
needs  
● Proactive plans to address academic and 
social/emotional supports upon return to school from 
absences including supplemental instruction provided 
by qualified subject-area teachers and service 
providers in order to scaffold missed and ongoing 
instruction in the classroom and to enable students to 
catch up with and stay on pace with classmates  


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 8 of 12 
 
 
 
 
3.  Comprehensive Evaluation  
BPS ensures that all students with SCD receive a timely, 
comprehensive evaluation of all areas of suspected disability to 
determine the nature and extent of a student’s need, if any, for 
specialized instruction or related aids and services. BPS ensures 
that a neuropsychological evaluation is considered as part of a 
comprehensive evaluation for any student with SCD.  
 
B.  
FREE APPROPRIATE PUBLIC EDUCATION 
To address needs for students with SCD, BPS ensures that—as 
part of special education and related services that may be 
identified through comprehensive evaluations—any 504 plans 
and/or IEPs specifically address challenges students with SCD 
face related to health and safety needs, academic needs, social-
emotional needs, resuming school after absences, and 
stagnations and/or declines in academic progress or 
performance. BPS therefore ensures the utilization of a checklist 
of potential accommodations at each Section 504/IEP Team 
meeting for a student with SCD. The checklist is considered in 
addition to all other appropriate services and supports 
determined necessary for an individual student with SCD to 
receive a free appropriate public education. BPS ensures that 
documentation of each item’s consideration by the 504 or IEP 
team is included in meeting minutes and provided to parents.  
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 9 of 12 
 
 
 
 
BPS ensures that neither Individual Health Plans (IHPs) nor 
Individual Collaborative Health Plans (ICHPs) are used in lieu of a 
504 Plan, IEP or interim accommodation plan.  
Additional points requiring particular attention:  
1.  Continually Updating Health and Safety Services/Supports  
BPS ensures that the 504 Plans and/or IEPs of children with SCD 
reflect the up-to-date health and safety needs of the child, 
recognizing that these needs may change during the course of 
the year. BPS ensures that any new information received 
regarding changed needs for a student with SCD will be 
addressed in light of the student’s 504 Plan or IEP.  
 
2.  Tracking Effects of Absences and Sudden Changes in 
Needs  
BPS ensures that, when a child with SCD has had absences and 
there has been a lack of expected progress toward annual goals 
in an IEP and/or in the general curriculum, discussions are 
promptly held regarding how the absences are interfering with 
academic progress and how this interference can be overcome, 
including consideration of instruction in the summer. BPS also 
ensures that sudden drops in academic performance and sudden 
increases in social-emotional needs that are experienced by 
students with SCD are detected and responded to appropriately.  
 
3.  Designation Director of Constituent Services If and When 
Services or Supports Are Not Provided  


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 10 of 12 
 
 
 
 
BPS ensures that students with SCD, their parents, and (with 
proper consent/privacy precautions) their medical team have 
access to the Boston Public Schools Director of Constituent 
Services to escalate concerns they have about a child with SCD 
not receiving a free appropriate public education. This process is 
separate from and does not preclude due process and grievance 
rights available under Section 504 and IDEA. These mechanisms 
are necessary given the severity and swiftness of the health, 
academic, and social-emotional consequences that can occur for 
children with SCD.  
 
C.  
ENSURING APPROPRIATE CULTURE WITHIN BPS 
REGARDING SCD 
BPS ensures that the culture regarding SCD with BPS includes:  
● believing students with SCD when they communicate that 
they: are in pain, are having some other complication, or are 
unable to perform a certain task due to their symptoms  
● not blaming or shaming students with SCD or their parents 
for their challenges  
● identifying challenges quickly and working collaboratively 
to find appropriate solutions  
● facilitating awareness that children with SCD are members 
of school communities  
● facilitating an understanding of what SCD is and its 
implications for health and safety  


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 11 of 12 
 
 
 
 
● facilitating an understanding of the services/supports that 
students with SCD may need to ensure their health and 
safety, as well as an understanding of the importance of 
adhering to these accommodations  
● facilitating an understanding of the special education and 
related services a student with SCD may need to ensure 
their access to a free appropriate public education  
 
1. Awareness and Trainings  
As part of ensuring an appropriate culture regarding SCD, BPS 
conducts ongoing outreach and public awareness campaigns 
that address each aspect of an appropriate culture described 
above. BPS also conducts ongoing training for all teachers, 
administrators, nurses, and other relevant staff. Training covers all 
necessary topics to ensure that all BPS staff coming into contact 
with students with SCD have the necessary knowledge and 
awareness to properly implement all policies, protocols, and 
procedures regarding SCD and to appropriately support the 
student with SCD. School nurses receive additional periodic 
training in managing the medical needs of students with SCD. 
 
2. Scope and Frequency of Awareness and Training Activities  
BPS ensures that awareness and training efforts are wide enough 
in scope to reach all appropriate personnel and repeat with 
enough frequency to reach any new or temporary personnel who 
may enter over the course of a school year.  


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 12 of 12 
 
 
 
 
D.  
DATA MONITORING  
BPS conducts sufficient data monitoring to track successes and 
failures in the implementation of its policies, protocols, and 
procedures regarding SCD. This monitoring includes 
documenting instances where students with SCD, their parents, 
and/or their medical team had to escalate concerns about health 
and safety services/supports being provided or followed and/or a 
free appropriate public education being properly provided. The 
data produced is regularly reported through summary statistics 
without personally identifiable information to the SCD Advisory 
Group and publicly via BPS website postings and press releases.  
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent   


Page 1:
 
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SHS-08 
Version 01 
 
MEDICATION ADMINISTRATION 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
POLICY FOR ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATIONS 
The school nurse is the supervisor of the medication 
administration program in the school.  The school nurse is the 
only staff authorized to administer medication except in two 
situations: (1) during field trips and (2) in the event of a life-
threatening allergic reaction requiring administration of 
Epinephrine via an autoinjector. The school nurse is responsible 
for training designated staff in the administration of medication 
in these two situations. This policy is in accordance with 
Massachusetts state regulations for administration of medication 
in public schools (105 CMR 210.000). The protocol has been 
approved by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health. For 
more detailed information, please refer to the 105 CMR 210: 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH   
PROTOCOL FOR ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATION 
This section is a summary of the medication protocol. The full 
protocol is in the Nurses’ Protocol and Procedure Manual and 
contains the referenced forms. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 2 of 14 
 
General: 
● The school nurse shall be the supervisor of the medication 
administration program in the school. 
● All school nurses will have read the complete Medication 
Policy and 105 CMR 210.000- THE ADMINISTRATION OF 
PRESCRIPTION MEDICATIONS IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE 
SCHOOLS annually. 
● The school nurse, in collaboration with the parent or guardian, 
shall establish a medication administration plan for each 
student receiving medication, in accordance with the details of 
the full medication policy. 
● In accordance with standard nursing practice, the school nurse 
may refuse to administer, or allow to be administered, any 
medication which, based on their individual assessment and 
professional judgment, has the potential to be harmful, 
dangerous, or inappropriate.  In these cases, the 
parent/guardian and licensed prescriber shall be notified 
immediately by the school nurse and the reason for refusal 
explained. The school nurse will document the above in the 
electronic medical record (EMR).  
● Health Services administration is accountable for reviewing all 
aspects of medication administration and ensuring that the 
Massachusetts Standards of Nursing Practice are upheld.  
When inconsistencies are discovered, the school nurse will be 
counseled, and the head of school/principal informed.  When 
inadequacies continue (despite appropriate counseling and 
support), the issue and the measures taken will be 
documented in the nurse’s performance evaluation. Auditing 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 3 of 14 
 
will occur as part of routine site visit or as incidents deem 
necessary. 
Handling, Storage, and Disposal of Medications  
● All prescription medications shall lie stored in their original 
pharmacy or manufacturer labeled containers and, in such 
manner, as to render them safe and effective.  
● All prescription medications to be administered by school 
personnel shall be kept in a securely locked cabinet used 
exclusively for medications, which is kept locked except when 
opened to obtain medications. The medication cabinet is to be 
accessed solely by the school nurse. The cabinet shall be 
substantially constructed and anchored securely to a solid 
surface. Prescription medications requiring refrigeration shall 
be stored in either a locked box in a refrigerator or in a locked 
refrigerator maintained at temperatures of 38F to 42F. 
● Access to stored prescription medications shall be limited to 
persons authorized to administer prescription medications and 
to self-medicating students, to the extent permitted by school 
policy developed pursuant to 105 CMR 210.006(B)(8). Access to 
keys and knowledge of the location of keys shall be restricted 
to the maximum extent possible. Students who are self-
medicating shall not have access to other students’ 
medications.  
● Parents or guardians may retrieve the prescription 
medications from the school at any time. 
● No more than a 30 school-day supply of the prescription 
medication for a student shall be stored at the school.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 4 of 14 
 
● Where possible, all unused, discontinued, or outdated 
prescription medications shall be returned to the parent or 
guardian and the return appropriately documented. In 
extenuating circumstances, with parental consent, when 
possible, such prescription medications may be destroyed by 
the school nurse in accordance with any applicable policies of 
the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, Division of 
Food and Drugs. 
● The school nurse is responsible for maintaining the 
confidentiality of a students’ health record, including 
medications. Do not discuss or share information about 
students or medications with other school staff or people 
outside school unless directed to do so by the school nurse. 
Refer all questions or comments about students or 
medications to the school nurse. 
Medication Orders/Parental Consent 
● The school nurse shall ensure that there is a proper medication 
order from a licensed prescriber which is renewed annually 
and when changes are made to the orders. The 
parent/guardian must sign a consent for the administration of 
the medication every time a change is made. 
● A new order must be obtained at the beginning of the 
academic year for all daily medications/treatments and any 
PRN medications. 
● All students with medication orders should have a medication 
administration plan and an IHP.  
● Medication orders will be transcribed into the Electronic 
Medical Record (EMR) using the date the order was written by 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 5 of 14 
 
the prescriber until the end of the school year. (The official end 
of the school year is the last day of the Extended School Year 
(ESY) program.  
● A telephone order or an order for any change in medication 
shall be received only by the school nurse. Any such verbal 
order must be followed by a written order within three school 
days.  
● The prescriber Medication Order form should be used. It is 
recommended that the Boston Public Schools Medication 
Order Form be completed by the prescriber, as the form 
contains the necessary information about the medication. 
Orders may be accepted from a prescriber that has not used 
the BPS Medication Order form as long as all necessary 
information is on the letter or form. The parent/guardian must 
consent to the administration of medication in school. 
Reporting and Documentation of Medication Errors 
● A medication error includes any failure to administer 
medication as prescribed for a particular student, including 
failure to administer the medication:  
● within appropriate time frames (the appropriate time frame 
should be addressed in the medication administration plan)  
● in the correct dosage 
● in accordance with accepted practice 
● to the correct student 
In the event of a medication error, the school nurse shall notify 
the parent or guardian immediately. (The school nurse shall 
document the effort to reach the parent or guardian.) If there is a 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 6 of 14 
 
question of potential harm to the student, the nurse shall also 
notify the student's licensed prescriber or school physician.  
Medication errors shall be reported to the Health Services 
nursing leadership and documented by the school nurse utilizing 
the medication error report form. These reports shall be retained 
by Health Services leadership and within the student electronic 
health record where applicable. They shall be made available to 
the Department of Public Health upon request. 
All medication errors resulting in serious illness/injury requiring 
medical care shall be immediately reported to the Health 
Services leadership who will make the decision, as necessary, to 
further report to the Department of Public Health, Drug Control 
Program utilizing the Drug Incident Report.   
All suspected diversion or tampering of drugs shall be reported to 
the Health Services nursing leadership and to the Department of 
Public Health, Division of Food and Drugs.  
The school nurse shall review reports of medication errors and 
take necessary steps to ensure appropriate medication 
administration in the future.   
Over The Counter (OTC) Medications, i.e., Non-Prescription 
Medications 
● The school nurse shall follow the Board of Registration in 
Nursing protocols listed in their Advisory Ruling (AR) 
Medication Administration of Over-the-Counter Drugs (AR 92-
05) regarding required provider orders and safety steps in the 
administration of OTC medications in schools. (Board of 
Registration in Nursing Advisory Ruling 92-05  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 7 of 14 
 
● The school physician is responsible for the OTC Standing 
Orders policy, in consultation with the Office of Health Services 
nursing leadership and feedback from the school nurse body 
and will sign off on a standing order for administration of OTC 
medications (Appendix).   
● OTC medications may only be administered once during any 
school day (except as noted). If requested more than two times 
in any given week, or a pattern of regular usage develops, the 
school nurse will contact the parent/guardian for provider 
guidance per Standing Order protocol.  
● OTC medication may NOT be administered without parental 
permission. 
● A one-time dose of an OTC medication may be administered 
with verbal parental/guardian consent in the event that a 
paper consent form has not been signed, the parent/guardian 
must return a signed consent form within two school days 
following the administration for future administration.  
Herbal Preparations 
● Herbal preparations/medications are to be considered over-
the-counter medications and are subject to the same 
regulations and require parental permission.  
● Herbal preparations/medications must be listed in the U.S. 
Pharmacopeia (USP.org) in order to be given in school. 
● The OTC standing orders do not cover herbal 
preparations/medications and require a prescription from an 
appropriate and duly licensed prescriber. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 8 of 14 
 
Special Medication Situations 
● For short-term medications, i.e., those requiring administration 
for ten school days or fewer, the pharmacy-labeled container 
may be used in lieu of a licensed prescriber’s order.  
● Investigational new drugs may be administered in the schools 
with (a) a written order by a licensed prescriber, (b) written 
consent of the parent or guardian, and (c) a pharmacy-labeled 
container for dispensing.  If there is a question, the school 
nurse may seek consultation and/or approval from the school 
physician to administer the medication in the school setting.  
Controlled Substances 
● Students may require medications that fall under the category 
of “controlled substances.” 
● The detailed protocol for administration of controlled 
substances is in the BPS Nurses Protocol and Procedure 
Manual. 
Medications During Transport 
● Asthma exacerbations may occur while in transport.  A self-
medication plan would address this issue and allow for the 
child to carry and self-administer the medication without the 
supervision of the school nurse.  The student should be advised 
to report to the school nurse if they require treatment en route 
to or from school. 
●  Emergency medications, other than Epinephrine, cannot be 
administered by the bus driver/transportation monitor. The 
driver is expected to pull over and call 911 EMS if there is an 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 9 of 14 
 
emergent need and there are no licensed personnel 
accompanying the child.  
Anaphylaxis 
● Nurses, in conjunction with building administrators, MUST 
have a plan in place to ensure the safety of those children with 
life threatening allergies requiring the administration of 
Epinephrine. 
● In the event of a life-threatening, previously undiagnosed 
anaphylactic reaction, the school nurse may administer 
epinephrine in the protocol dosages.  
● The school physician is responsible for reviewing and renewing 
the anaphylaxis protocol on an annual basis.  
● Refer to Superintendent Circular SHS-11 “Life Threatening 
Allergies (LTA or Anaphylaxis)” for specifics.  
Asthma 
● If a child with known asthma has a severe exacerbation while 
at school and there is no order for medications administered 
via nebulizer from the child’s primary care provider, the nurse 
may administer a nebulizer or Metered Dose Inhaler (MDI) 
treatment, under the school physician’s order and according to 
the asthma protocol (BPS protocol and procedure manual). 
● The emergent use of nebulizer should occur within the context 
of the child’s primary or specialty care management. After the 
first episode of medication administered via nebulizer or MDI 
utilizing standing orders, every effort should be made to 
secure a treatment plan which includes use of PRN nebulizer 
with feedback to the family and/or the primary care provider. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 10 of 14 
 
● If there are no subsequent medication treatment orders from 
the patient’s primary care provider, the parent will be notified 
and 911 will be accessed in the event of an asthma 
exacerbation. 
Delegation/Supervision for Field Trips and Life-Threatening 
Allergic Reactions 
● The school nurse shall have final decision-making authority 
with respect to delegating administration of medications to 
unlicensed personnel in the school system. Boston Public 
Schools is registered with the Department of Public Health 
and has chosen to limit delegation to field trips only.  
● When medication administration is delegated by the school 
nurse to unlicensed school personnel, such personnel shall be 
under the supervision of the school nurse for the purposes of 
medication administration. 
● After consultation with the principal or administrator 
responsible for a given school, the school nurse shall be 
responsible to select, train, and supervise the school personnel 
approved by the school nurse to administer medications on 
field trips.  When necessary to protect student health and 
safety, the school nurse may rescind such selection. 
● A school nurse shall be on duty in the school system while 
medications are being administered by designated unlicensed 
school personnel, and available by telephone should 
consultation be required. 
● The administration of parenteral medications may not be 
delegated.  


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 11 of 14 
 
● Medications to be administered pursuant to PRN (“as needed”) 
orders may be delegated to be administered by authorized 
school personnel while on a field trip after an assessment by or 
consultation with the school nurse for each dose.   
Note: any medications that require a nursing assessment 
may not be delegated with the exception of asthma 
medications. 
● For each school, an updated list of unlicensed school 
personnel who have been trained in the administration of 
Epinephrine shall be maintained by the school nurse. Upon 
request, a parent shall be provided with a list of school 
personnel trained to administer medications on field trips and 
in life threatening cases. Note: It is the expectation that all 
school staff are trained by the school nurse in Epinephrine via 
an autoinjector administration twice a year and complete a 
return-demonstration to the nurse. 
● Designated, trained medication delegation school personnel 
shall be listed on the specific student’s medication 
administration plan.  
● Principals/head of school or the district department 
sponsoring the trips have the primary responsibility to ensure 
that all procedures pertaining to field trips are followed by 
their school and establish clear and transparts internal 
protocols for field trip requests and approvals at the school 
level. 
● Before approval of a field trip, the lead chaperone must consult 
with the school leader to determine if and what type of 
medical assistance is needed for participating students. To 
ensure accessibility, this step is crucial, and must take place 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 12 of 14 
 
before the field trip is secured. For additional questions, please 
consult the Health Services Department. Additionally, to 
thoroughly support a student's participation in a field trip, at 
least six weeks before departure (much longer for international 
and overnight field trip programs), consult with, and when 
necessary, receive training from the school nurse regarding 
any students who have medical needs. 
● Refer to Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 General Guidelines 
and Procedures for All Field Trips for additional information. 
Self-Administration of Medications 
Consistent with school policy, students may self-administer 
prescription medication provided that certain conditions are met. 
For the purposes of 105 CMR 210.000, “self-administration” shall 
mean that the student is able to consume or apply prescription 
medication in the manner directed by the licensed prescriber, 
without additional assistance or direction.  
For a child to self-administer, the following must be in place: 
● Parent/guardian approval. 
● An assessment by the school nurse that the student is capable 
of self-medication administration. 
● The school nurse develops an individualized medication 
administration plan (105 CMR 210.005(E) for that student which 
is agreed to by the parent/guardian and contains: 
○ Documentation by a designated school personnel or by 
the student, when the student is assessed as capable by 
the school nurse, that medication was self-administered. 
○ Periodic review of process by school nurse 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 13 of 14 
 
○ Determines a safe place for storing the medication for the 
individual student, while providing for accessibility if the 
student’s health needs require it. 
○ Documentation of teacher’s and student’s knowledge of 
the medication dose, frequency, and side effects, the 
disease process for which the medication is being 
administered, the safety of the plan and the student’s 
ability to self-administer the medication, and the student’s 
compliance with the identified plan.  
● A medication order from a licensed prescriber for this student’s 
medication. 
● In the absence of a school nurse, the school administrator will 
contact a health services administrator to assist with the 
development of an appropriate plan of care which includes all 
the above.   
● All self-medication administration plans must be renewed 
annually. 
Health Services administration is accountable for reviewing all 
aspects of medication administration and ensuring that the 
Massachusetts Standards of Nursing Practice are upheld.  When 
inconsistencies are discovered, the school nurse will be 
counseled, and the head of school/principal informed. 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Month 
Activity 
January  
Send an updated list of nurses/schools 
to MA DPH.  
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 14 of 14 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent   


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
SHS-20  
Version 01 
 
ASTHMA IN SCHOOLS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
POLICY STATEMENT 
The Boston Public Schools recognizes that a clear, concise policy 
on asthma management in school can impact academic 
achievement. All schools must have protocols and procedures for 
children with asthma and evaluate the implementation of these 
plans regularly. This document outlines the comprehensive and 
collaborative nature of managing a child’s asthma within a school 
setting. 
BACKGROUND ON ASTHMA 
Because asthma is one of the most common chronic childhood 
illnesses and a major cause of student absences, it is important 
for schools to adopt a comprehensive, coordinated approach to 
addressing asthma. 
While asthma affects people of all ages, races, genders, and 
segments of society, the burden is not equally shared across 
racial and ethnic groups. It is most often a disease of the young 
and of the poor. In 2020, 25.3 million Americans reported a 
diagnosis of asthma. Of those, 21 million were adults, and 4.2 
million were children.1 Nearly half of children (52.7%) and adults 
with asthma living below the poverty level reported an asthma 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-20 
Page 2 of 9 
 
attack in the past year2, which is an indication of poor asthma 
control. Children and people living below the poverty level are 
among the groups most likely to have asthma, and to suffer from 
severe asthma attacks, hospitalization, and even death. Asthma 
morbidity and mortality are disproportionately burdensome for 
African Americans and Hispanics, who are least likely to have 
access to health education and adequate healthcare.  
A comprehensive plan includes management and support 
systems, appropriate health and mental health services, 
educational programs for staff and students, appropriate and 
reasonable environmental remediation, and communication 
systems with home and child clinicians. 
These components need to be integrated with community efforts 
that include the medical and mental health fields, housing and 
community air quality improvements, and active engagement of 
families. 
This document links with the Medication Administration Policy 
and Management of Life-Threatening Allergic Reaction policies.  
PROTOCOL FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
Role of the Parent 
• At the time of registration, the parent/guardian should 
inform the Welcome Center staff of any health concerns of 
their child, including asthma. The Health Services 
Department remains available to support any student or 
parent/guardian wishing to discuss this information 
privately.  
• Complete emergency forms indicating that their child has 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-20 
Page 3 of 9 
 
asthma and include emergency numbers. 
• Provide the school nurse with a current Asthma Action Plan 
and emergency management plan from the student’s 
physician and/or pulmonologist. It is recommended that the 
parent/guardian meet with the school nurse in person to 
discuss their child’s plan. 
• Review with your child’s primary care provider/specialist and 
sign all asthma forms presented by the school nurse. These 
may include a combination of the following: 
o Permission for a school nurse to communicate with the 
family and the primary care provider/specialist 
o Authorization to dispense medication 
o Consent for child’s self-administration of asthma 
medicine (when developmentally appropriate) 
o The Parent/Guardian Asthma Questionnaire 
o The Asthma Action Plan 
• Provide the school with a pharmacy-labeled supply of 
medications (oral and inhalers), including nebulizer 
medications, masks, and tubing. Most health rooms have 
nebulizers but are not equipped with extra masks and 
tubing. 
• Participate in the Asthma Action Plan for their child with the 
child’s health practitioner and deliver the completed asthma 
action plan to the school nurse. 
• Provide a cell phone number or other emergency number/s 
• Assure that the pre-school and after-school staff has the 
appropriate information and training. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-20 
Page 4 of 9 
 
Role of the School Administrator 
• Support faculty, staff, and parents in implementing all 
aspects of the asthma management program, including 
self-management. 
• Support the development of a schoolwide policy, with input 
from the School Site Council, for management of the school 
environment, which includes, but is not limited to: 
o Maintaining an active Integrated Pest Management 
Program 
o Review of and action on annual school inspections 
o Use of green cleaners 
o Enforcement of the tobacco-free policy 
• Ensure there is a contingency plan for a substitute nurse, 
teacher, or food service personnel who is not familiar with 
the child. 
• Ensure that the classroom staff is informed about asthma 
prevention, management, and emergency response. 
• Support program development, especially in schools with 
higher than the state average of students diagnosed with 
asthma or with large numbers of absenteeism related to 
asthma. 
• Review environmental inspections and ensure that all work 
orders occur in a timely fashion. 
• Support the student support team, the school nurse, and 
the classroom teacher in identifying children with increased 
absenteeism in relation to asthma. 
• Inform the school nurse 4-6 weeks in advance of field trips 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-20 
Page 5 of 9 
 
to thoroughly support a student's participation in a field trip 
and ensure adequate planning time (e.g., staff training, 
preparation of medications) 
Role of the Student (where it is developmentally appropriate) 
• Sign off on self-administration plan guidelines. 
• Participate in self-management program(s) such as Open 
Airways or Kickn’ Asthma to help better identify triggers 
that may cause asthma symptoms and response. 
• Complete the “Student Breathing/Asthma Questionnaire.” 
Role of the School Nurse 
• Obtain and review the student’s current Asthma Action Plan 
(AAP) and other pertinent information from the student’s 
parents/guardians and health care providers, including 
medication administration permission form. 
• Obtain releases for nurse/health care provider 
communication and physician authorization for medication. 
• Administer medication per provider order, monitor asthma 
control, coordinate care, and maintain records. 
• Provide safe storage and easy access to prescribed 
medication when needed. 
• Promote and encourage independence and self-care 
consistent with the student’s ability, skill, maturity, and 
development as indicated in the AAP. After reviewing the 
AAP with the parents/guardians and student, implement, 
review, and update the plan throughout the school year as 
needed. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-20 
Page 6 of 9 
 
• Develop a plan for student management in the classroom, 
lunchroom, playground, and athletic field that provides 
routine and emergency care. 
• Complete with the student (where developmentally 
appropriate) the Student Breathing/Asthma questionnaire. 
• Ensure that all other staff members (including coaches) who 
have contact with children with asthma are familiar with 
their Asthma Action Plan on a need-to-know basis. Teachers 
should be contacted individually rather than with lists 
posted. 
• Provide a list of students with life-threatening allergies as a 
component to their asthma (if consent is given by parent) to 
all staff on a need-to-know basis; lists must be maintained in 
a confidential manner to protect students’ privacy. 
• Conduct in-service training and education for appropriate 
staff regarding asthma symptoms, risk reduction 
procedures, and emergency procedures. This information 
should be reviewed annually, preferably at the beginning of 
the school year.  
• Ensure that there is a contingency plan in place in all school-
related venues where substitutes are utilized. 
• Communicate with parents regularly to discuss issues 
relating to the plan. 
Role of the Teacher 
• Maintain a discrete list of all students in the classroom with 
asthma; lists must be maintained in a confidential manner 
to protect students’ privacy. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-20 
Page 7 of 9 
 
• Participate in asthma awareness professional development 
opportunities, as needed. 
• Inform volunteers, student teachers, aides, specialists, and 
substitute teachers about the child's asthma needs on a 
need-to-know basis, while maintaining student 
confidentiality. 
• Provide the school nurse with an adequate warning (4-6 
weeks for field trips) about school-sponsored off-site 
activities. 
• Notify the school nurse of any concerns. 
Role of Off-site Staff  
• Maintain a list of all students with severe persistent asthma; 
lists must be maintained in a confidential manner to protect 
students’ privacy. 
• Coaches will be informed of any students on their teams 
who have asthma (through review in ASPEN/Sports 
Clearance form) and trained in asthma awareness and 
maximizing athletic performance. 
• Allow responsible students to self-medicate during practices 
and sports events; students must have a self-medication 
plan on file with the school nurse. 
       Role of the Coordinator of Special Education (COSE): 
• If a student is referred for consideration for a 504 
accommodation plan and/or special education, the COSE 
will process as appropriate; the parent/guardian, school 
nurse, and other school staff must be involved in the plan 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-20 
Page 8 of 9 
 
development and implementation. 
• If a student is eligible for a 504 accommodation plan (or is 
being evaluated for a 504 accommodation plan), the team 
will discuss eligibility for transportation. 
• If a student already has an IEP (or is being evaluated) and 
transportation may be necessary for the medical condition 
(but not necessarily the area of educational disability), the 
team shall consider transportation needs (team shall include 
school nurse). If special transportation is necessary, it can be 
added to the IEP. 
 
REFERENCES 
Managing Asthma: A Guide for Schools 
Asthma Self-Management Skills, American Lung Association 
CDC Strategies for Managing Asthma in Schools 
1CDC Most Recent National Asthma Data 
2American Lung Association Controlling Childhood Asthma 
and Reducing Emergencies Initiative 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-20 
Page 9 of 9 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent   


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FNS-06 
Version 01 
 
 
 
1 
FOOD AND NUTRITION SERVICES MENU AND 
INGREDIENT GUIDELINES  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The Boston Public Schools (BPS) Food and Nutrition Services 
(FNS) Menu and Ingredient Guidelines are the benchmarks for 
food quality, food safety, nutrition, and variety. They are applied 
primarily to menu development and procurement and support 
the Nutrition Standard of Food and Nutrition Services. They 
pertain to all USDA programs administered by FNS. 
FNS continuously monitors its work related to these guidelines 
and updates them annually between school years. The guidelines 
are informed by sources of evidence-based research, and ad hoc 
related to ingredients and standards for operation. 
FNS Menu and Ingredient Guidelines align with the Good Food 
Purchasing Program and continuously strive to meet the Menus 
of Change Principles of the Culinary Institute of America. These 
values and principles, respectively, are embedded within the FNS 
Menu and Ingredient Guidelines. 
The Menu and Ingredient Guidelines are grouped below under 
the following headings:  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-06 
Page 2 of 17 
 
 
 
 
A. Provide nourishing and culturally diverse food choices 
according to regulations  
B. Offer variety of whole, fresh, local foods 
C. Establish levels for some fats, sugar, sodium  
D. Eliminate additives 
E. Define animal welfare standards 
F. Other 
 
A. Provide nourishing and culturally diverse food choices that 
meet or exceed USDA National School Lunch and School 
Breakfast Program guidelines as well as guidelines of 
Massachusetts Department of Public Health, City of Boston, 
and Boston Public Schools Wellness Policy.  
FNS strictly follows or exceeds the USDA National School 
Lunch and School Breakfast Programs Meal Pattern for the 
healthy meal choices that it offers and the frequency that 
choices are served. 
For Boston schools:  
• Menus follow at least a four-week cycle and continuously 
evolve for diversity, updates, variety, and trends, reflecting 
student preferences.  
• Menus for all BPS food service models are as much like 
each other as possible. 
• Lunch menus have at least one vegetarian entrée daily 
and feature at least one vegan protein option per menu 
cycle during in-person meal service. 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-06 
Page 3 of 17 
 
 
 
B. Offer a variety of whole foods that are fresh, high quality, 
emphasize local, and foods, as purchased, that retain most 
of their inherent physical, chemical, sensory and nutritional 
properties. These foods should meet the food quality 
requirement as noted throughout these Guidelines.  
• Menus favor local, seasonal ingredients. Local items are 
featured based on availability, primarily on salad bars, as 
well as one or more additional local meal components 
during the week, to include whole grains, fish, and dairy, 
within budget parameters. Local, defined as New 
England, is intended to increase in volume over time for 
all service models. 
• Menus offer a variety of fruits and vegetables.  
o FNS offers at least two fruits (minimum one fresh; may 
also serve unsweetened canned/frozen, packed in its 
own juice, and dried fruit at breakfast and lunch)  
o FNS offers at least three fresh vegetables and one fresh 
fruit daily at schools (MWCs) with salad bars. Schools 
without salad bars offer a minimum of one or more 
fresh fruit and/or vegetables daily.  
o Frozen and canned vegetables (salt-free or low-
sodium) may be served, as appropriate. 
o Legumes/beans are offered at a minimum of once per 
week at all sites for lunch. 
• Menus offer legumes and beans as a plant-based protein 
option to meet the meat alternate component 
requirements of meal pattern.  
• Menus will provide all the weekly grains as whole grain-
rich and offered in salad bars, sides, and entrees. Local 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-06 
Page 4 of 17 
 
 
 
whole grain-rich items will be featured. 
• Menus offer a variety of lean proteins, including animal 
and plant-based options (i.e.., chicken, turkey, beef, fish, 
tofu, beans). Menus offer commercially purchased whole 
muscle meat or entrees made from whole muscle meat, 
with no fillers. 
• Beef is lean, USDA Grade Choice or better, and contains 
100% beef only. 
• Eggs are USDA Grade A or equivalent and USDA 
inspected; frozen eggs are USDA inspected.  
• Seafood must be U.S. Department of Commerce-
inspected. 
• FNS offers foods that have as little packaging as possible, 
with the goal of eliminating all but reasonable, necessary 
packaging. Packaged foods include those served 
selectively, at the discretion of FNS and primarily in 
settings that have no cooking equipment, for Breakfast in 
the Classroom, field trips, and occasionally for grab-and-
go carts. Where possible, meals offered in the classroom, 
for field trips and on carts align with meals offered in 
dining rooms. 
• FNS is moving away from unitized/packaged meals 
toward on-site meal preparation.  
C. Decrease the amount of saturated fat, monitor added 
sugar and excess sodium.  
• Menu choices favor entrees that are low in saturated fat 
(less than 10% based on the average for a 5-day menu 
week). 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-06 
Page 5 of 17 
 
 
 
• Healthy oil(s) are used in most food preparation. Butter is 
used sparingly. 
• All liquid milk is rBGH-free. 
• All dairy is low fat (1%) or non-fat (skim), excluding butter.  
• FNS currently observes USDA Target 1 sodium limits: 
o In line with the federal rules, on or before school year 
2024-2025, FNS intends to decrease average daily 
sodium levels to reach Target 2 standards established 
by the USDA Final Rule “Nutrition Standards in the 
National School Lunch and School Breakfast Programs 
(1/26/12)”. 
• Added sugar content is monitored by following the below 
guidelines, with the aim to decrease daily added sugar 
intake: 
o Cereal may contain no more than 6 gm added sugar 
(1.5 teaspoons) (for 1 grain equivalent) and must be 
identical nutritional/ingredients with retail product. 
o Breakfast grain/grain components may contain up to 8 
gm (2 teaspoons) added sugar. 
o For two grain equivalents, there will be no more than 
14 gm (4.5 teaspoons) added sugar. 
o Yogurt may have 15 gm of added sugar (4.5+ 
teaspoons) or less per serving. 
• Beverages may include fruit-infused water at hydration 
stations in school dining rooms.  
D. Eliminate additives and ingredients that aren’t needed for 
product integrity. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-06 
Page 6 of 17 
 
 
 
• The following unnecessary or unnatural ingredients are 
prohibited from menu items. 
• Additives and ingredients will be monitored and adjusted 
according to evidence-based research.  
• Coloring: 
o Artificial colors (including synthetic food dyes) 
o Annatto and Cochineal extract/carmine 
o Caramel color class III and IV avoided in beverages, 
food, and sauces. Caramel color class IV may be 
featured in gravies, which are used sparingly. 
• Artificial flavors: artificial synthetic flavors 
• Artificial preservatives: Benzoates & benzoic acid, 
BHA/BHT/TBHQ; nitrates/nitrites; propyl gallate, sulfites 
• Artificial sweeteners & other sugar free non-nutritive, low 
calorie and reduced calorie sweeteners: Sucralose, 
aspartame, saccharine, Neotame, acesulfame k 
[acesulfame potassium] 
• Flavor enhancers: GMP, MSG 
• Binders and Fillers: isolate vegetable proteins and 
hydrolyzed vegetable protein as filler 
• Thickening agents: Carrageenan 
• Caffeine 
• Sugary syrups: High fructose corn syrup (HFCS), high 
maltose corn syrup, high dextrose corn syrup, tapioca 
syrup 
• Partially hydrogenated oils; trans fats 
• Emulsifiers: 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-06 
Page 7 of 17 
 
 
 
o Brominated Vegetable Oil (BVO)  
o Carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) and Polysorbates 
• Flour treatment agents: (azodicarbonamide, bleached 
flour, bromated flour [potassium bromate], potassium 
iodate) 
• Nitrites/Nitrates and Processed Meat: Meat that has been 
transformed through salting., curing, fermentation, 
smoking, or other processes to enhance flavor or improve 
preservation. Examples of processed meat include hot 
dogs (frankfurters), deli meat, ham, sausage, corned beef, 
beef jerky and canned meat. 
• Rendered meat, irradiated meat, meat with latent Tgf-
beta binding protein (LTBP)* 
• Ammonium hydroxide, vegetable protein analogues, or 
extenders 
E. Work toward procurement of animals untreated with 
hormones, steroids, or antibiotics that serve no vital 
function. 
• Due to growing concerns of animal husbandry practices, 
FNS supports responsible use of antibiotics in animals.  
o Menu features chickens raised without the use of 
antibiotics ever. 
▪ Menu features entrees utilizing chicken products 
following One Health Certified (OHC) standards.37 
OHC addresses several important areas of animal 
agriculture within a sustainable continuous 
improvement process. 
o Menu features turkey products produced under a 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-06 
Page 8 of 17 
 
 
 
USDA process verified program that includes 
compliance with the following Certified Responsible 
Antibiotic Use (CRAU) criteria: 
i. No administration of antibiotics pre-hatch 
ii. Antibiotics with analogues in human medicine are 
not allowed for: 
▪ Disease prevention 
▪ Growth promotion 
▪ Feed efficiency, or 
▪ Weight gain 
iii. Antibiotics with human analogs can only be used 
therapeutically to: 
• Treat disease in poultry with bacterial disease  
• Control disease in poultry exposed to infectious 
bacteria 
• FNS is opposed to the use of hormones and steroid 
growth promoters in beef and dairy cattle production. 
FNS continues to research food products from beef or 
dairy cattle produced without hormone growth 
promoters and grass-fed products as options become 
available. FNS acknowledges some USDA commodity 
products (beef, dairy and poultry) are purchased without 
the transparency of animal practices, and therefore, FNS 
limits how often these products are served. USDA 
commodity proteins may be made from whole muscle 
meat or restructured meat*. 
F. Other guidelines are observed as follows: 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-06 
Page 9 of 17 
 
 
 
• All school dining areas are peanut aware. No school 
kitchens will serve peanuts or tree nuts. 
• FNS accommodates students with medically prescribed 
dietary requirements. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Nutrition Manager 
Department: 
Food and Nutrition Services 
Mailing Address: 
370 Columbia Road, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9144 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-06 
Page 10 of 17 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
1 Center for Good Food Purchasing. 
https://goodfoodpurchasing.org. Last reviewed 2020. Accessed 
January 26, 2020. 
2 Menus of Change. https://www.menusofchange.org. Last 
reviewed 2021. Accessed May 14, 2021. 
3 Michigan State University. What is a processed food? 
https://www.canr.msu.edu/news/what_is_a_processed_food 
4 American Heart Association. Healthy Cooking Oils. 
https://www.heart.org/en/healthy-living/healthy-eating/eat-
smart/fats/healthy-cooking-oils. Last reviewed April 24, 2018. 
Accessed January 14, 2020.  
5 American Heart Association. Children should eat less than 25 
grams of added sugars daily. 
https://newsroom.heart.org/news/children-should-eat-less-than-
25-grams-of-added-sugars-daily 
6 Center for Science in the Public Interest. Chemical Cuisine, 
Learn About Food Additives. https://cspinet.org/eating-
healthy/chemical-cuisine. Published 2014. Accessed June 26, 2019.  
7 Kobylewski S, Jacobson MF. Food dyes: A Rainbow of Risks. 
Washington D.C.; 2010. https://cspinet.org/new/pdf/food-dyes-
rainbow-of-risks.pdf. 
8 Lefferts LY, Jacobson MF, MacCleery L. Seeing Red: Time for 
Action in Food Dyes. Washington D.C.; 2016. 
http://cspinet.org/reports/seeing-red-report.pdf.  


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-06 
Page 11 of 17 
 
 
 
9 Conners CK, Goyette CH, Southwick DA, Lees JM, Andrulonis PA. 
Food additives and hyperkinesis: a controlled double-blind 
experiment. Pediatrics. 1976;58(2):154-166.  
10 Stevenson J, Buitelaar J, Cortese S, et al. Research review: the 
role of diet in the treatment of attention deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder—an appraisal of the evidence on efficacy and 
recommendations on the design of future studies. J Child 
Psychol Psychiatry. 2014;55(5):416-427. doi:10.1111/jcpp.12215.  
11 Bateman B, Warner JO, Hutchinson E, et al. The effects of a 
double blind, placebo controlled, artificial food colourings and 
benzoate preservative challenge on hyperactivity in a general 
population sample of preschool children. Arch Dis Child. 2004; 
89:506-511. doi:10.1136/adc.2003.031435.  
12 McCann D, Barrett A, Cooper A, et al. Food additives and 
hyperactive behavior in 3-year-old and 8/9-year-old children in 
the community: a randomized, double-blinded, placebo- 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2007;370(9598):1560-1567. doi:10.1016/ 
S0140-6736(07)61306-3.  
13 Saeed MG, Sayeed SA, Ashraf S, et al. Investigations of In vitro 
Digestibility of Proteins Bound to Food Colors. Journal of 
Pharmacy and Nutrition Sciences. 2011, 1, 34-40.  
14 USDA Food and Drug Administration D of H and HS. Specific 
Food Labeling Requirements. Code of Federal Regulations. 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSea
rch.cfm?CFRPart=101.  
15 Piper, P. Potential safety issues surrounding the use of 
benzoate preservatives. Beverages. 2018;4(2):33. doi: 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-06 
Page 12 of 17 
 
 
 
10.3390/beverages4020033.  
16 NTP (National Toxicology Program). 2016. Report on 
Carcinogens, Fourteenth Edition.; Research Triangle Park, NC: U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health 
Service. https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/go/roc14.  
17 Jakszyn P, Gonzalez C-A. Nitrosamine and related food intake 
and gastric and esophageal cancer risk: a systematic review of 
the epidemiological evidence. World J Gastroenterol. 
2006;12(27):4296-4303. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16865769.  
18 Alhoff J, Grandjean C. In vivo studies in Syrian golden hamsters: 
a transplacental bioassay of ten nitrosamines. Natl Cancer Inst 
Monogr. 1979;(51):251-255. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/481578.  
19 International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). IARC 
Monographs evaluate consumption of red meat and processed 
meat. 2015. doi: https://www.iarc.fr/en/media-
centre/pr/2015/pdfs/pr240_E.pdf.  
20 National Toxicology Program. Carcinogenesis Bioassay of 
Propyl Gallate in F344 Rats and B6C3F1 Mice. Bethesda; 1982. 
https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/ntp/htdocs/lt_rpts/tr240.pdf.  
21 Ham J, Lim W, Park S, et al. Synthetic phenolic antioxidant 
propyl gallate induces male infertility through disruption of 
calcium homeostasis and mitochondrial function. Environ 
Pollut.2019 May; 248:845-856. Doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2019.02.087.  
22 Abdo KM, Kari FW. The sensitivity of the NTP bioassay for 
carcinogen hazard evaluation can be modulated by dietary 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-06 
Page 13 of 17 
 
 
 
restriction. Exp Toxicol Pathol. 1996;48(2-3):129-137. doi: 
10.1016/S0940-2993(96)80033-9.  
23 Soffritti M, Belpoggi F, Degli Esposti D, Lambertini L, Tibaldi E, 
Rigano A. First experimental demonstration of the multipotential 
carcinogenic effects of aspartame administered in the feed to 
Sprague-Dawley rats. Environ Health Perspect. 2006;114(3):379-
385. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16507461.  
24 Schernhammer ES, Bertrand KA, Birmann BM, Sampson L, 
Willett WC, Feskanich D. Consumption of artificial sweetener-and 
sugar-containing soda and risk of lymphoma and leukemia in 
men and women. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012;96(6):1419-1428. 
doi:10.3945/ajcn.111.030833.  
25 M. S, M. P, E. T, et al. Sucralose administrated in feed, beginning 
prenatally through lifespan, induces hematopoietic neoplasias in 
male swiss mice. Int J Occup Environ Health. 2016;22(1):7-17. doi: 
10.1080/10773525.2015.1106075.  
 
26 Liauchonak I, Qorri B, Dawoud F, Riat Y, Szewczuk MR. Non-
Nutritive Sweeteners and Their Implications on the Development 
of Metabolic Syndrome. Nutrients. 2019; 11(3):644.  
27 Raiten DJ, Talbot JM, Fisher KD. Executive summary from the 
report: analysis of adverse reactions to monosodium glutamate 
(MSG). J Nutr. 1995;125(11):2891S-2906S. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7472671. 
28 Bray GA, Nielsen SJ, Popkin BM. Consumption of high-fructose 
corn syrup in beverages may play July 2019 a role in the epidemic 
of obesity. Am J Clin Nutr. 2004; 79(4):537-543. 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-06 
Page 14 of 17 
 
 
 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15051594.  
29 American Heart Association. Trans Fats. 
http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/HealthyLiving/HealthEating/Nu
trition/TransFats_UCM_301120_Article.jsp#.V2HUpvkrJhE.  
30 US Food and Drug Administration. Frequently Asked Questions 
on Azodicarbonamide (ADA). 
http://www.fda.gov/Food/IngredientsPackagingLabeling/FoodAd
ditivesIngredients/ucm387497.htm.  
31 Bukhari SSI, Azam I, Abbasi MH, Daud M, Sheikh N, Batool A, 
Mahmood R, and Mukhtar M. Effect of Alloxan on IL-6 Gene 
Expression in Mus musulus. Biologia (Pakistan). 2018; 64(1):69-73. 
https://www.gcu.edu.pk/Publications/Biologia/Vol64_No1_2018.pd
f#page=65. 
32 International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). 
Summaries & Evaluations Potassium Bromate (Group 2B). 1999. 
http://www.inchem.org/documents/iarc/vol73/73-17.html  
33 US EPA IRISD. Bromate CASRN 15541-45-4. IRIS Assessments. 
https://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/iris2/chemicalLanding.cfm?substance
_nmbr=1002. Published 2001. Accessed July 24, 2019.  
34 Cornucopia Institute. Behind the Bean: The Heroes and 
Charlatans of the Natural and Organic Soy Foods Industry.; 2009. 
https://www.cornucopia.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/09/behindthebean_color_final.pdf.  
35 Berkeley Wellness. Ask the Experts, Hexane in Soy Food. 
Berkeley Wellness, Univ Calif. May 2012. 
https://www.berkeleywellness.com/healthy-eating/food-
safety/article/hexane-soy-food.  


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-06 
Page 15 of 17 
 
 
 
36 Women’s Health. ‘Soy Protein Isolate’ Is in So Many Things—But 
Is It Healthy?; 2019. 
https://www.womenshealthmag.com/food/a27559289/soy-
isolate-protein/.  
37 One Health Certification Foundation. Five Core Principles. 
https://onehealthcertified.org/about/core-principles/ 
38 U.S. Department of Agriculture. Certified Responsible Antibiotic 
Use. https://www.ams.usda.gov/services/auditing/crau  
Minneapolis Public Schools Culinary and Wellness Services True 
Food Nutrition Philosophy 2019-2020 
(https://cws.mpls.k12.mn.us/uploads/cws_nutrition_philosophy.pd
f) and Culinary & Wellness Services Ingredient Guide 
(https://cws.mpls.k12.mn.us/uploads/mps_ingredient_guide_full.p
df) served as models for the Boston Public Schools Food and 
Nutrition Services Menu and Ingredient Guidelines. 
Healthy School Campaign Ingredient Guidelines 
https://www.google.com/url?q=https://healthyschoolscampaign.o
rg/dev/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/Ingredient-Guide-
2021.pdf&sa=D&source=docs&ust=1689510987098278&usg=AOvVa
w2a5uRgrXBkhb6Xz9zJ6ESc 
 
 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-06 
Page 16 of 17 
 
 
 
NOTES:  
*Sugar calculation  
 
Yogurt:  
12 grams of sugar in 4 oz. of “Sweetened Yogurt”  
15 grams of sugar in 4 oz. vanilla-flavored yogurt 
 
Breakfast Condiment:  
6 grams of sugar in 1 oz. “Yogurt Dipping Sauce”  
8 grams of sugar in .4 oz. of table syrup individual 
package 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-06 
Page 17 of 17 
 
 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FNS-03 
Version 01 
 
FOOD AND NUTRITION POLICY ON COMPETITIVE FOOD 
AND BEVERAGES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
These guidelines will cover food and beverages that are sold, 
provided, or served to students within school buildings or on 
school grounds, in the student stores, cafeterias, classrooms, 
hallways, and vending machines, all of which are sold outside of 
(i.e., in competition with) the federally funded School Meal 
Program. These guidelines also apply to fundraisers, classroom 
activities, and school events. This includes food and beverages 
supplied by schools during official transportation to and from 
school and district-sponsored activities, including but not limited 
to field trips and interscholastic sporting events where the school 
is the visiting team. See the Implementation Guidelines section 
for details. 
INTRODUCTION  
In response to continuing concerns regarding childhood 
overweight and obesity as well as other diet-related diseases in 
our city’s school-aged children, the Boston School Committee 
has approved the following policy language regarding beverages 
and food in schools.   


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 2 of 21 
 
These guidelines were first adopted on July 1, 2004, and were 
implemented with the start of school in September 2004. They 
were updated in April 2011 and June 2015 to take into 
consideration new federal and state nutrition guidelines that 
impact the overall health and wellness of our students and staff,  
specifically the Healthy Hunger-Free Kids Act, 2010. Most recently, 
they were updated in August 2017 to reflect changes in the 
District Wellness Policy. This document is intended to assist 
school administrators in implementing these guidelines in their 
schools.  
All such competitive foods shall meet the criteria outlined in the 
implementation guidelines that follow. This includes food and 
beverages sold, provided, or served to students in:  
● School cafeterias, specifically “a la carte” entrees and 
snacks 
● Vending machines  
● School stores  
● School snack bars  
● Concession stands  
● Classrooms and hallways  
● Booster sales  
● Fundraising activities  
● School-sponsored or school-related events, including 
those with school-sponsored transportation occurring off 
school grounds, such as sporting events and field days  
● Food trucks on school grounds  
 
These guidelines apply to entrees, snacks, side items, and 
desserts offered or sold outside of the school meals program. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 3 of 21 
 
Items that would be considered entrées if sold in the 
reimbursable meal program, but are sold a la carte as 
Competitive Foods, are not subject to these guidelines. This 
policy will be reviewed once yearly by a sub-committee of the 
Boston Public Schools (BPS) District Wellness Council. 
BACKGROUND  
Schools across the city, state, and nation have been grappling 
with developing meaningful and applicable guidelines on this 
issue of obesity for the past decade. Earlier “Competitive Food 
Guidelines,” set forth by USDA and individual state departments 
of education, prohibited only the sale of foods of minimal 
nutritional value (Federal Register: 7 CFR Part 210.11). These 
standards attempted to address types of foods and beverages 
sold, provided, or served to students within school buildings. 
While some state standards may have been useful thirty years 
ago, most are outdated, as they do not address the growing 
availability of vending machines, foods, candy, and soda sold 
inside and outside of the cafeteria at fundraisers or in student 
stores. Competitive foods are relatively low in nutrient density 
and high in fat, added sugar, and calories. Neither a la carte nor 
competitive foods are bound by dietary guidelines that the 
National School Lunch (NSLP), National School Breakfast, and 
After School Snack Programs must adhere to.  
National and state departments of education, school boards, food 
policy advocacy organizations, the American Academy of 
Pediatrics, the Center for Science in the Public Interest, state 
dietetic and school food service associations, and other 
representative groups have met over the past several years to 
establish or recommend nutrition standards to promote healthy 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 4 of 21 
 
eating habits among children. Massachusetts A La Carte Food 
Standards to Promote a Healthier School Environment is a 
guideline that has been established by the Massachusetts Action 
for Healthy Kids, first adopted in January 2004 and updated in 
December 2009. These guidelines, along with the Institute of 
Medicine, the Alliance for a Healthier Generation Competitive 
Foods and School Beverage Guidelines, nutrition standards from 
the School Nutrition Bill (H4459, S2322), and the HealthierUS 
School Challenge informed the latest revision to our policy. In 
accordance with Mayor Menino’s Executive Order Relative to 
Healthy Beverage Options1, all beverages sold on school grounds 
shall meet the city’s Healthy Options Beverage Standards.  
POLICY  
The Boston Public Schools supports lifelong healthy eating habits 
for all students and staff and is committed to addressing the 
increasing rates of diet-related health consequences among 
these groups by creating a healthy school food environment. 
Serving healthy choices in the lunchroom, limiting availability 
and marketing of unhealthy foods and sugary drinks, and making 
water available to students throughout the day are some of the 
ways to create a healthy school food environment. BPS is 
committed to ensuring food sold or served outside of the 
cafeteria meets high nutritional standards.   
BPS believes the cafeteria is an essential setting to educate and 
promote healthy eating habits. BPS is committed to serving 
students nutritious and delicious food that is less processed, 
more locally sourced, and culturally responsive to reflect the 
diverse student population. As an effective way to improve the 
nutritional quality of foods served in schools and consumed by 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 5 of 21 
 
students, the district created and implemented menu and 
ingredient guidelines exceeding federal requirements. BPS will 
continue a constant review of school food and the food 
environment to ensure safety, quality, menu equity, and 
innovation. The district will be an innovator with school food, 
serving foods that are new and exciting for the students. We 
believe that students deserve meals reflective of their culture and 
tastes. We believe eating well is not a privilege; it is a right.   
Key requirements of creating a healthy school food environment 
are:  
School Meals Program  
● Ensure all menus meet USDA-mandated requirements, as 
well as Massachusetts Department of Public Health 
regulations and the latest scientific evidence on healthy 
eating practices. At a minimum, schools must follow 
Bronze status standards for the Alliance for a Healthier 
Generation2, and work toward Bronze status standards 
for the HealthierUS School Challenge3.  
● Ensure all menus offer variety and are well presented in 
an appealing way, and meals and menu items are labeled 
to communicate deliciousness, as well as specific 
ingredients.  
● Encourage students to participate in breakfast, lunch, and 
afterschool meals programs and avoid stigmatizing 
children who participate.  
● Provide food with “clean” labels that are free of unwanted 
ingredients, including trans fats, high fructose corn syrup, 
artificial colors, artificial sweeteners, additives 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 6 of 21 
 
(azodicarbonamide, bromated flour), and artificial 
preservatives (nitrates, nitrites, sulfates, sulfites, MSG, 
BHA, BHT, TBHQ). 
● Reduce material used for packaging, sourcing recyclable 
or compostable materials when possible, and working to 
promote best practices around recycling and 
composting.  
● Make water available at no cost during mealtimes 
wherever meals are served.  
Food Safety   
● Ensure kitchen facilities (both prep and satellite locations) 
are inspected twice a year by the Inspectional Services 
Division (ISD - Health Department).  
● Implement a stringent and detailed internal Hazard 
Analysis and Control Points (HACCP) plan that provides 
regulations in following safety procedures for food recalls, 
emergency preparedness to avoid foodborne illnesses, 
and the spread of infectious diseases.  
● Ensure all employees who work 5+ hours are  Food Safety.  
● Ensure all lead employees are allergy awareness certified 
and have American Heart Association HeartSaver First Aid 
Program 2-year certification.   
Nutrition Education, Promotion and Food & Beverage Marketing  
● Promote health and nutrition messages that encourage 
the consumption of fruits and vegetables, whole grains, 
healthy fats, low-fat dairy products, and water; and other 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 7 of 21 
 
messages consistent with research-based findings that 
indicate a positive impact on health.  
● Identify opportunities to teach healthy eating habits in 
health education, physical education, and other subjects, 
and through cafeteria and other school-wide promotions.  
● Identify opportunities to support teachers, school staff, 
and parents around modeling healthy eating habits and 
following appropriate nutritional standards at school 
celebrations and staff meetings. 
● Only allow food and beverage marketing on school 
grounds, including items shared with students, that 
promote foods and/or beverages that meet the BPS 
nutritional standards.  
Competitive Food & Beverages  
● Follow federal, state, and local laws and Forbid the sale of 
food and beverages by anyone other than the Food and 
Nutrition Services Department, which is solely responsible 
for food and beverages sold to children during the school 
day. regulations for competitive foods and beverages (i.e., 
foods sold, provided, or served within school buildings or 
on school grounds outside of the school meals program) 
in all schools, as outlined in this circular.  
● Prohibit food sold in competition with school meals, 
including food-based fundraisers and vending machines 
during the school day.  
● Encourage non-food alternatives for school fundraisers, 
school parties, and classroom celebrations.  


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 8 of 21 
 
● Prohibit the use of food and beverage as a reward or 
means of discipline.  
All BPS schools shall follow Food and Nutrition Services policies 
and circulars.   
IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES 
Competitive Food and Beverages  
Regulations on competitive food sales in schools and vending 
machines are contained in regulations established by the 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 9 of 21 
 
Massachusetts Board of Education. Failure to follow these 
regulations may result in loss of federal funding.1,2,3,4,5,6,7  
The Food and Nutrition Services Department is solely responsible 
for food and beverages sold to children during the school day; 
 
1 Regulatory Authority M.G.L. C.15, § 1G 
2 Federal Register, 2013, 7 CFR Parts 210 and 220, National School 
Lunch Program and School Breakfast Program: Nutrition 
Standards for All Foods Sold in Schools as Required by the 
Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010; Interim Final Rule, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, 78 (125) (June 28, 2013). 
3 Federal Register, 2014, 7 CFR Parts 210 and 220, Local School 
Wellness Policy Implementation under the Healthy, Hunger-Free 
Kids Act of 2010: Proposed Rule, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
79 (38) (February 26, 2014). 
4 Massachusetts General Laws (2010). Chapter 111, Section 223, 
5 State of Massachusetts, Chapter 96 of the Acts of 2012 
(amendment to 2010 law),. 
6 Massachusetts Department of Public Health (2010), Nutrition 
Standards for Competitive Foods and Beverages in Public 
Schools, 105 CMR 225.000 
7 Massachusetts Department of Public Health (2012). “Students, 
Healthy Schools: Revised Guidance for Implementing the 
Massachusetts School Nutrition Standards for Competitive Foods 
and Beverages” 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 10 of 21 
 
consequently, the sale of food and beverages by others is 
expressly forbidden.  
The income for the total food and beverage service regularly 
maintained on school premises shall accrue to the school food 
services program to be used solely for the operation or 
improvement of such service. This shall include the income from 
the sale of a la carte foods and beverages. Food sales operated for 
profit (this includes bake and candy sales) shall not operate 
during the regular school day. 
The sale of a la carte foods shall be restricted to those items 
recognized as contributing to or permitted to be served as part of 
the breakfast or lunch. This restriction automatically eliminates 
the sale of candy, carbonated beverages, etc. Fundraising 
activities can only operate after school hours. 
Canteen Services at School Site Locations 
7 CFR 210, 220 Competitive Foods: Federal regulations prevent 
the sale of candy, gum, and carbonated beverages to students on 
school premises from the beginning of the school day to the end 
of the last lunch period.  
The sale of food items from canteen trucks (with the exception of 
an open campus), school stores, or other areas that compete with 
school meals, time, and money is in violation of federal 
regulations. These sales further divert income essential to the 
financial well-being of the Food and Nutrition Services program. 
Use of canteen services on school premises by students should 
be prohibited. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 11 of 21 
 
Preparation of all competitive foods and beverages must meet 
state and federal food safety guidelines.  
In accordance with 105 CMR 225.100, nutrition information must 
be made available to students for non-prepackaged competitive 
foods and beverages as of August 1, 2013. This requirement shall 
not apply to the sale or provision of fresh fruits or fresh 
vegetables, and foods or beverages sold during the school day at 
booster sales, concession stands and other school-sponsored or 
school-related fundraisers and events.   
No competitive food and beverages shall be sold, served, or 
provided during school mealtimes.  
Implementation guidelines must comply with or exceed nutrition 
standards delineated by 105 CMR 225.000: Nutrition Standards 
for Competitive Foods and Beverages in Public Schools. 
All foods sold, served, or provided at schools should meet the 
guidelines given in FNS-06. 
Beverages  
The total beverage product line must meet the following criteria:  
● Schools may sell, provide, or serve only plain water and 
juice. All milk is unflavored. No flavored milk will be 
offered to students. Beverages such as soft drinks, fruit 
drinks with the minimal nutritional value, and sports 
drinks cannot be sold, provided, or served to students 
anywhere in school buildings or on the school campus.  
● Plain drinking water must be readily available during the 
school day at no cost. 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 12 of 21 
 
● Drinking water must be caffeine-free, have 0 mg of 
sodium, and have no nutritive or non-nutritive 
sweeteners. Natural flavorings and carbonation are 
acceptable.  
● Beverages shall not contain added sugars, including high 
fructose corn syrup and non-nutritive sweeteners.  
● No beverages shall contain artificial sweeteners.  
● Competitive juice beverages will not be offered in 
elementary schools (i.e., grades PreK-5). Fruit and/or 
vegetable based drinks sold in middle and high schools 
(i.e., grades 6-12) must be composed of no less than 100% 
fruit/vegetable juices with no added sweeteners, not to 
exceed 4 ounces in middle schools (i.e. grades 6-8), and 
not to exceed 8 ounces in high school (i.e., grades 9-12),  
with 120 calories/8 oz. plus 10% Daily Value of 3 vitamins 
and nutrients, such as Vitamin A, C, D and calcium  
● All milk and milk substitute products shall be pasteurized 
fluid types of low fat (1%) or skim (fat free) milk which 
meet USDA, state, and local standards for milk. All milk 
shall contain Vitamins A and D at levels specified by the 
Food and Drug Administration and shall be consistent 
with the state and local standards for such milk. All milk, 
flavored milk, and milk substitute container sizes shall not 
exceed 8 ounces.  
● Soy, rice, and other milk-substitute drinks shall be 
calcium and vitamin-fortified and shall contain no more 
than 22 grams total sugars per 8 ounces.  
● No beverages shall contain more than trace amounts of 
caffeine.  


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 13 of 21 
 
● City of Boston agencies in BPS buildings may offer 8 oz. of 
100% juice or low-fat and nonfat milk products in vending 
machines available only outside of the school day.  
Foods  
Fresh fruits and/or non-fried vegetables must be offered 
wherever competitive foods are sold, provided, or served to 
students except in non-refrigerated vending machines and 
vending machines offering only beverages. Use of fryolators in 
preparing competitive foods is prohibited.  
In addition, competitive foods must meet the following 
nutritional criteria per item:  
• Any other food that meets all the following criteria:  
a. ≤ 35% of total calories from fat.  
i. Nuts, nut butters, and seeds are exempt from 
above limitation and are permitted if served in 1 oz 
portions.  
ii. Fruit and nut combination products are exempt 
from the above limitation.  
iii. If products are dairy, they must be non-fat or low 
fat dairy.  
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 14 of 21 
 
b. ≤ 10% of calories from saturated fat OR ≤1g saturated 
fat  
i. Nuts, nut butters, and seeds are exempt from 
above limitation and are permitted if served in 1 oz 
portions.  
c. 0g trans fat  
d. ≤ 35% of weight from total sugars in foods  
i. Non-fat or low-fat yogurt with a maximum of 30g 
sugar per 8 ounces.  
e. ≤ 200 mg sodium  
i. A la carte entrees like cheese sandwiches, 
vegetables with sauce, and soups must be less 
than 480 mg sodium if they contain one or more 
of the following: 
1. ≥2g fiber  
2. ≥5g protein  
3. ≥10% DV of Vitamin A, C, E, folate, calcium, 
magnesium, potassium, or iron  
f. Meet 1 of the following calorie requirements:  
i. 
≤100 calories  
ii. 
Vegetables with sauce and soups can have 150 
calories if they contain two or more of the 
following: ≥2g fiber; or ≥5g protein; or ≥10% DV of 
Vitamin A, C, E, folate, calcium, magnesium, 
potassium, or iron; or ≥½ serving (¼ cup) of fruit 
or vegetables.  
iii. 
Other foods can have calorie limits per below if 
they contain one or more of the following:  


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 15 of 21 
 
1. ≥ 2g fiber  
2. ≥ 5g protein  
3. ≥ 10% DV of Vitamin A, C, E, folate, calcium, 
magnesium, potassium, or iron  
4. ≥ ½ serving (1/4 cup) of fruit or vegetables:  
a. 
≤ 150 calories for elementary schools  
b. 
≤ 180 calories for middle and  
c. 
≤ 200 calories for high schools 
• Bread and other whole grain-based products shall have a 
whole grain (such as whole wheat) listed as the first 
ingredient or contain grains that are at least 51% whole 
grains.  
• No more than trace amounts of caffeine are allowed in 
foods.  
• Foods must contain no artificial sweeteners.  
• Foods must have limited added sweeteners as much as 
possible.  
• Fruits shall have no added sweeteners and have 0g total fat. 
Since fresh fruits and vegetables vary in size and calories 
naturally, they have no calorie limit.  
• Fruits packaged in their own juices or dried will not exceed 
the following calorie limits: 150 calories for elementary 
schools, 180 calories for middle schools and 200 calories for 
high schools.  
• Dried fruit and nut combination products (commonly 
known as trail mix) can be included within these guidelines 
if they meet the following standards:  
a. The items found in the combination product include 
only unsweetened dried fruit, nuts, and/or seeds.  


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 16 of 21 
 
b. The product contains no added sweeteners.  
c. The combination product is exempt from the ≤ 35% of 
total calories from fat requirement, but must meet all 
requirements around calories, saturated fat, trans fat, 
sodium, sugar, and positive nutrients.  
• Any one egg or equal amount of egg equivalent is allowable 
if it contains no added fat.  
• Any reduced-fat or part-skim cheese ≤1 oz. 
Time Of Day  
The guidelines apply to all food and beverages (outside the USDA 
School Meals and After School Snack Program) provided to 
students on school grounds during the regular and extended 
school day when events are primarily under the control of the 
school or third parties on behalf of the school.  
The extended school day is the time before or after the official 
school day that includes activities such as clubs, yearbook, band 
and choir practice, student government, drama, sports practices, 
intramural sports, and childcare/latchkey programs.   
Vending machines, including those controlled by other entities in 
BPS buildings and grounds, shall comply with these guidelines at 
all times. Automatic timers will be used to limit access to 
competitive foods and beverages in vending machines during 
the school day, including during school mealtimes.  
Fundraisers, Classroom Parties, Food Rewards, and Meetings  
All fundraisers must meet Boston Public Schools’ 
implementation guidelines for competitive food. No food-based 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 17 of 21 
 
fundraisers are permitted during school meals. The building 
administrator or designee is responsible for approving all 
fundraisers. Classroom parties must also comply with Boston 
Public School’s competitive food guidelines and notification of 
the cafeteria manager is requested to help the cafeteria plan 
appropriately. Principals and staff will promote a school 
environment supportive of healthy eating. Adults are encouraged 
to model healthy eating by serving nutritious food and beverages 
at school meetings and events.  
Teachers and staff should refrain from providing candy and 
snacks of minimal nutritional value as rewards for students and 
instead integrate practices of non-food rewards. Food and 
beverage cannot be used as a reward means of discipline.  
If schools participate in fundraising involving food and beverages, 
the fundraiser should support a healthy school environment and 
be free from solicitation of foods that do not meet the 
specifications of the Dietary Guidelines for Americans. 
Fundraisers should not include the sale of candy, beverages, and 
snacks that do not meet the Boston Public Schools’ 
implementation guidelines for competitive foods.  
 
Schools should develop communication and tools to provide to 
PTA and other groups who are conducting fundraising, 
celebrations, meetings, and rewards for the school so that non-
food activities are used.  
Allergies  
Schools should consider all students with food allergies and 
make appropriate plans and accommodations in any food-based 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 18 of 21 
 
fundraiser, celebration, and/or reward according to the guidance 
provided in Superintendent’s Circular SHS-11, which provides 
more information on student allergies.  
Support For Implementation  
This is a citywide initiative, with the Boston Public Schools taking 
the lead to implement healthy snack and beverage guidelines. 
The Mayor’s Office, the Boston Public Health Commission (BPHC), 
and the Boston Centers for Youth and Families (BCYF) are all in 
full support of these policies.  
To assist with this transition, Food and Nutrition Services will 
continue meeting with vendors and manufacturers to discuss 
product specifications that meet these guidelines. Language 
referencing new policies is included in the Request for Bids for 
beverages, dairy and ice cream, and snack food products.  
Vendors who are awarded single-year or multiple-year contracts 
must comply with the stated guidelines.  
With assistance from the School Wellness Council, students, 
teachers, parents, and administrators will be informed and 
educated about the new guidelines. Technical support will be 
provided to help schools and agency partners adjust to the 
revised standards, including providing resources on healthful 
forms of fundraising and meeting guidelines. The 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts passed a School Nutrition Bill 
(H4459, S2322). The BPS implementation guidelines have been 
revised to include state nutritional standards.  
MONITORING AND COMPLIANCE  
Schools will monitor compliance in the following ways:  


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 19 of 21 
 
● School wellness councils should assess and track their 
school’s compliance with this policy and include 
implementing goals on their Wellness Action Plan to 
ensure compliance with the policy.  
● All schools will biennially complete the School Health 
Profiles Surveys (Profiles), including questions on 
competitive foods and beverages. Individual school 
reports will be shared back with schools after completing 
Profiles, stating whether the school is complying with the 
policy. 
The principal and relevant operational leaders will be notified by 
FNS and the Office of Health & Wellness if a school is found to not 
be compliant. School administration, families, students, and 
Wellness Council will be provided information about the policy to 
engage and support monitoring, enforcement, and compliance.  
 
 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 20 of 21 
 
DEFINITIONS  
Food of Minimal Nutritional Value: Food that provides less than 
five percent of the Reference Daily Intakes (RDI) for each of eight 
specified nutrients per serving. 
A La Carte Foods: Sold typically in the cafeteria by the school 
food service department. They are separately and individually 
priced and are not usually part of the NSLP.  
Competitive Foods: Competitive foods or beverages means all 
foods or beverages sold or provided in public schools, other than 
non-sweetened carbonated water and those items sold or 
provided as part of federal nutrition programs such as the School 
Breakfast Program, School Lunch Program, and the Child and  
Adult Care including those offered in: School cafeterias; school 
stores; school snack bars; concession stands, booster sales, 
vending machines; fundraising activities; school-sponsored or 
school-related events; food trucks, and any other location in 
public schools.  
REFERENCES 
Alliance for a Healthier Generation Standards 
Healthier US School Challenge Standards 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 21 of 21 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
 
Owner:  
Deputy Director 
Department:  
Food and Nutrition Services 
Mailing Address:  370 Columbia Road, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-9143 
Fax:  
617-635-9304 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Owner:  
Senior Executive Director 
Department:  
Office of Health and Wellness 
Mailing Address:  2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone:  
617-635-6643 
Fax:  
617-635-1502 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FNS-02 
Version 01 
 
1 
EMERGENCY MEAL PROCEDURES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 In the event of an unforeseen emergency, school staff must 
adhere to the following procedures to ensure meals are made 
available to students in a safe and timely manner. “Emergency” is 
defined as equipment breakdown, weather, facility issues, etc. or 
a situation that prevents staff from serving safe meals during the 
allotted mealtimes scheduled. The procedures are: 
1. Principal or custodian should inform onsite food service 
personnel that there is an emergency preventing the service 
of meals and approximately how long the emergency will 
last. Often this is difficult to assess. However, if the 
emergency is anticipated to be longer than 60 to 90 
minutes after the start of the school day, alternative meal 
service plans need to be made to ensure students receive 
meals in a safe and timely manner.  
2. The Food and Nutrition Services Department should be 
informed immediately. The phone number is 617-635-9144. 
The onsite Food Services Staff should also contact their 
respective field coordinator.  
3. Once the Food and Nutrition Services Department is 
notified about the emergency, a contingency plan that 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-02 
Page 2 of 9 
 
includes an alternate menu, mealtimes, or location will be 
jointly decided upon. A substitute emergency meal (shelf-
stable) which meets regulations may be provided if the 
emergency prevents access to the kitchen.  
4. If there is an emergency just before lunch, the onsite Food 
Services staff should be notified immediately. If needed, 
appropriate arrangements will be made to ensure students 
are fed quickly and efficiently. Food and Nutrition Services 
may need to provide an alternative meal, depending on the 
emergency. Delays may be expected. All staff should be 
flexible and patient.  
5. When and if the administration makes the decision to send 
the student body to another school or alternative location, 
the Food and Nutrition Services Department needs to be 
notified immediately to ensure food is available at the new 
location.  
6. This plan of action is dependent on cooperation from 
everyone.  
7. During a declared state of emergency, the attached 
instructions will be followed to issue USDA commodities. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-02 
Page 3 of 9 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Deputy Director 
Department: 
Food and Nutrition Services 
Mailing Address: 
370 Columbia Road, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9158 
Fax: 
617-635-9304 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-02 
Page 4 of 9 
 
MASSACHUSETTS PLAN FOR UTILIZATION OF USDA DONATED 
FOODS FOR DISASTER RELIEF 
1. Purpose: The purpose of this plan is to establish the 
procedure for obtaining the United States Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) donated commodities in Massachusetts 
during a presidential disaster.  
2. Background: The Secretary of Agriculture is responsible for 
ensuring that adequate stocks of food are available for 
group feeding or household distribution in any area 
suffering from a major disaster or emergency. During a 
disaster, food that has been purchased by the USDA for use 
in the state's food programs is made available to disaster 
organizations in that state. Food that is stored in school or 
state warehouses can be used immediately. The USDA will 
replace this food.  
3. General:  
• USDA donated foods will not be distributed to 
individual families except when the Secretary of 
Agriculture determines that the commercial channels 
of trade have been disrupted because of the 
emergency caused by a disaster.  
• In Massachusetts, USDA foods (which become the 
property of the Commonwealth) are distributed by the 
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and 
Secondary Education, Nutrition Programs and Services, 
75 Pleasant Street, Malden, MA 02148-4906.  
• Contact should be made with the local authorities to 
establish a plan to procure these items. All foods are 
free of charge to the Red Cross. There may be a small 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-02 
Page 5 of 9 
 
service charge for handling.  
• Food items are also stored in bulk in four warehouses 
throughout the Commonwealth. In the event sufficient 
foods are not available in the schools, they may be 
requested by the school lunch personnel through their 
channels or through the American Red Cross Mass Bay 
Chapter office.  
• Transportation needed to move the food to the disaster 
area is not available from the Department of 
Elementary and Secondary Education. It is 
recommended that chapters develop local 
contingency plans. The key to prompt and efficient 
transportation of these foods is prior planning by the 
chapter.  
• Food will be released when the President has declared 
a disaster area, or when the Commonwealth has 
requested a declaration. They will also be released 
upon request of Red Cross or governmental authorities 
when a disaster appears to be imminent, people being 
evacuated, or mass feeding is needed for a substantial 
number of dislocated families and individuals.  
4. Procedure for obtaining USDA donated foods for Red Cross 
mass feeding:  
• When the feeding is being done by school lunch 
personnel:  
o They will make food available from their supply.  
o When additional foods are required, they will 
request them. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-02 
Page 6 of 9 
 
• When the feeding is being done by other than school 
lunch personnel, the Red Cross will make its request 
through the Mass Bay office of the Red Cross. It will 
include a synopsis of the disaster situation and the 
estimated amounts and kinds of food commodities 
required.  
• The nearest warehouse or other facility will be 
instructed to release the food.  
• The Red Cross will dispatch the necessary 
transportation to pick up the foods.  
• In all instances, temporary receipts will be signed, 
followed by more formal procedures.  
5. Procedures for returning used foods:  
• If a large amount of food is to be returned, the 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education 
will send an agent to the Red Cross to arrange the 
details of the return. If only a small amount is to be 
returned, the Red Cross will be instructed to turn it 
over to the designated school in the area. In either 
case, the Red Cross should obtain and file a receipt for 
the returned food.  
6. Procedure for reporting on USDA donated foods: 
• After mass feeding is completed, the Red Cross will be 
advised on the information necessary to enable the 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education 
to report on commodities distributed for disaster relief, 
including certification that all food products were used 
in accordance with existing regulations and used for 
mass feeding.  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-02 
Page 7 of 9 
 
• The program for use of USDA donated foods in the 
disaster will be considered completed when all unused 
food has been returned and the above report has been 
submitted.  
American Red Cross:  
Liberty Black 
Director of Disaster Services 
Mass. DESE: 
Robert M. Leshin 
Director, Office for Food and Nutrition Programs 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-02 
Page 8 of 9 
 
MASSACHUSETTS DEPARTMENT OF ELEMENTARY AND 
SECONDARY EDUCATION 
75 Pleasant Street, Malden, Massachusetts 02148-4906 
 
Telephone: (781) 338-3000 
TTY: N.E.T. Relay 1-800-439-2370 
MEMORANDUM 
To: 
All School and Child and Adult Care Food Program 
Sponsors 
From: 
 Kathleen C. Millett  
Former Executive Director, Office for Nutrition, Health 
and Safety Programs 
Date: 
 January 26, 2015  
Subject: Procedures for Using USDA Foods During an 
Emergency 
In the case where a school or childcare setting is officially 
designated as an emergency shelter, USDA Foods may be 
replaced. This memorandum serves to identify the process to use 
the USDA Foods and request replacement. After approval from 
this office, USDA donated foods will be made available to the 
American Red Cross or public schools for feeding in a congregate 
setting. The following steps are to be used to receive food 
assistance for food services during an emergency declaration. 
First, contact Marion Browning of the food distribution section at 
mbrowning@doe.mass.edu or 781-338-6460, email is preferred, 
with your immediate food needs, along with the estimated 
number of meals to be served. If you are unable to reach Ms. 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-02 
Page 9 of 9 
 
Browning, please email me at kmillett@doe.mass.edu or 781-338-
6479. Include the following information to the extent possible: 
• Description of major disaster or emergency situation. 
• Number of people requiring meals and congregate meal 
service period. 
• Quantity and types of food needed for congregate meal 
service. 
• Number and location of sites providing congregate meal 
service. 
Once the request for donated foods is approved, you may use any 
USDA donated foods available at your school. After the crisis has 
passed, please report the following information to the 
commodity distribution section: 
• Amount of USDA commodities actually utilized. 
• Number of days of the meal service and number of meals 
actually served (i.e., 2,000 persons, three meals per day for 
five days). 
We will make every effort to replace the value of USDA donated 
foods used with inventory from our warehouse. 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FNS-04 
Version 01 
 
1 
RESPONSIBILITIES REGARDING SCHOOL  
FOOD SERVICES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Food and Nutrition services is a federally funded program. The 
program’s operating revenue is supported by reimbursement 
from meals served to students. The department is audited 
annually, consisting of a review of the Community Eligibility 
Program which includes point of service, accountability, fiscal 
accountability, and overall procedures. 
School leaders share responsibility with the executive director of 
Food and Nutrition Services in ensuring that all federal, state, and 
local regulations applicable to the school’s food services are 
implemented and administered daily. There are area field 
coordinators who are assigned to oversee school-site foodservice 
operations.  
SCHOOL LUNCH AND BREAKFAST PROGRAMS  
Breakfast and Lunch Periods:  
● The state mandates sufficient time must be allocated for 
the students to eat lunch. At least a 30-minute lunch 
period is recommended, whenever possible. No less than 
20 minutes can be designated for a lunch period.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 2 of 10 
 
● If there is a change to the meal service time, the school 
leader must notify the Food Services staff immediately. 
Any changes to service impacts staffing and must be 
reviewed and discussed before finalizing.  
● Breakfast programs should be scheduled at least 15 to 30 
minutes before the start of school. This time is needed for 
Food Services staff to have the necessary capability for 
accurate meal counting and reporting.  
● Supervision is required at breakfast as well as lunch 
service. The school leader can make an administrative 
assignment or arrange for volunteers to provide student 
supervision. Food Service employees will not assume 
responsibility for supervising students.  
Breakfast After the Bell: 
As a continuation from SY2018-2019, the Massachusetts State 
Budget mandates public schools with at least 60 percent of their 
student population eligible for free or reduced-price meals to 
serve breakfast after the instructional day begins. All BPS schools 
must comply with this regulation.  
FNS understands implementing a change in breakfast service 
style has its challenges and has several resources available 
including marketing, equipment, and programs to ensure proper 
implementation of a comprehensive breakfast after the bell 
program that provides access to meals. FNS will keep cafeterias 
open 30 minutes past the bell time to continue provision of 
breakfast to all students. 
 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 3 of 10 
 
Lunch Menu:  
Federal regulations mandate lunch to consist of the following: 
● Meat or meat alternates  
● Whole grains  
● Vegetables 
● Fruits 
● Milk  
Breakfast Menu:  
Federal regulations mandate breakfast to consist of the 
following: 
● Meat or meat alternates  
● Whole grains 
● Fruits 
● Vegetables 
● Milk  
The menu as printed must be followed by FNS staff unless onsite 
food service staff receive approval from Food Services supervisory 
staff to make adjustments. Menu planning is the sole 
responsibility of the Department of Food and Nutrition Services. 
School administrators are encouraged to discuss their menu 
interest with the executive director of food services, 617-635-9144.  
COMMUNITY ELIGIBILITY PROGRAM  
This school year (2023-2024), in conjunction with the United 
States Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the Massachusetts 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education, Boston 
Public Schools (BPS) will continue to participate in the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 4 of 10 
 
Community Eligibility Provision (CEP), created by the Healthy, 
Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010. This is available for schools with 
high percentages of low-income children to provide breakfast 
and lunch to all students at no cost to them. The program 
increases participation in school meals, reduces labor costs for 
schools, and brings additional revenue to the school district from 
the USDA. In short, it allows for a healthier student body and a 
healthier school meal budget.  
All students in a Community Eligibility Provision (CEP) school are 
deemed as economically disadvantaged, and students are 
provided all meals — breakfast, lunch, after-school meals, and 
summer meals — at no cost. In the event a student requests a 
second meal, the cost is $4.00 . Students must pay at the time of 
the meal request. There are no credits or charges allowed.  
School administrators may establish a revolving fund to cover the 
cost of second meals for students without means. Second meals 
will not be provided without a source of payment.  
AFTER SCHOOL MEAL PROGRAM  
Supper meals are available at no charge to schools that have 
after school enrichment programs. Program directors must 
contact this office to arrange for student meals. There is a brief 
application process that should be completed at least 2 weeks 
prior to program start-up. All program directors are required to 
attend one mandatory annual training session. Program 
administrators are responsible for completing the daily tally 
sheets to document meals served. Tardy submission of these 
reports could result in the discontinuance of the program. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 5 of 10 
 
SUMMER MEAL PROGRAM 
Meals are provided throughout the City of Boston to all children. 
Meals consist of breakfast and lunch and are free to all children 
through age 18. 
FRESH FRUIT AND VEGETABLE PROGRAM (FFVP) 
The goal of the FFVP is to introduce children to fresh fruits and 
vegetables, to include new and different varieties, and to increase 
overall acceptance and consumption of fresh, unprocessed 
produce among children. The FFVP also encourages healthier 
school environments by promoting nutrition education. 
USE OF SCHOOL LUNCH FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTION 
● The National School Lunch Act and the State Department 
of Elementary and Secondary Education prohibit the 
denial of meals and milk as disciplinary action against 
school children.  
● Students may not be denied any part of the meal.  
● Students may not have a portion of the breakfast or lunch 
period taken away.  
● Any action that interferes with the student’s right to 
access meals or that discriminates against students in 
any way in the provision of meals is prohibited.  
COMPLIANCE WITH PROGRAM REGULATIONS 
We ask that school administrators assist with the enforcement of 
program regulations (e.g., federal regulations do not permit free 
or reduced reimbursement to ineligible children. There is no 
reimbursement for adult meals.) School administration will be 
charged for meals in which payment has not been received for 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 6 of 10 
 
student second meals and adult meals. Outstanding charges will 
be posted against individual school instructional supply 
accounts. 
MEAL SERVICE ACCOUNTABILITY OF SCHOOL 
ADMINISTRATORS 
To participate in the school lunch and breakfast programs, it is 
necessary for a contract to be in effect between the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the superintendent of 
schools. This agreement stipulates that state-approved controls 
are maintained to account for meals served. 
● School administrators are required to comply with the 
approved system in operation at the particular school site. 
● To assist with decreasing meal waste and improving 
accountability, it is recommended that elementary 
teachers ask students beforehand who will be eating 
lunch in the cafeteria or classroom and give that 
information to the food service staff one hour before 
lunch so they can have more accurate counts.  
● School leaders are to ensure that all students know their 
student ID numbers, required to be entered at the point 
of sale for accountability of each meal. 
● Milk cannot be served without payment.  
● Meal counts must be taken at the “point of service” (end 
of the line) when a student has received a reimbursable 
meal. Five food components must be offered for lunch 
and three components for breakfast. 
● In schools with classroom meal service, it is necessary to 
account for the meal served at the time of service. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 7 of 10 
 
COMPETITIVE FOOD SALES AND VENDING MACHINES 
Regulations on competitive food sales in schools and vending 
machines are contained in regulations established by the 
Massachusetts Board of Education. Failure to follow these 
regulations may result in loss of federal funding (see FNS 03 
Nutrition Policy). 
Regulatory Authority: 
● M.G.L. C.15, § 1G 
● Federal Register, 2013, 7 CFR Parts 210 and 220, National 
School Lunch Program and School Breakfast Program: 
Nutrition Standards for All Foods Sold in Schools as 
Required by the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010; 
Interim Final Rule, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 78 (125) 
(June 28, 2013). 
● Federal Register, 2014, 7 CFR Parts 210 and 220, Local 
School Wellness Policy Implementation under the 
Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010: Proposed Rule, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, 79 (38) (February 26, 2014). 
● Massachusetts General Laws (2010). Chapter 111, Section 
223. 
● General Law - Part I, Title XVI, Chapter 111, Section 223. 
● State of Massachusetts, Chapter 96 of the Acts of 2012 
(amendment to 2010 law), Acts of 2012 Chapter 96 - 
Session Laws. 
● Massachusetts Department of Public Health (2010), 
Nutrition Standards for Competitive Foods and Beverages 
in Public Schools,105 CMR 225.000 
● Massachusetts Department of Public Health (2012). 
“Students, Healthy Schools: Revised Guidance for 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 8 of 10 
 
Implementing the Massachusetts School Nutrition 
Standards for Competitive Foods and Beverages” Healthy 
Students, Healthy Schools: Revised GuIdance for 
Implementing the Massachusetts School Nutrition 
Standards for Competitive Foods and Beverages  
Only Food Services is permitted to sell to students.  
The Food and Nutrition Services Department is solely responsible 
for food and beverages sold to children during the school day; 
consequently, the sale of food and beverages by others is 
expressly forbidden.  
All income must accrue to Food Services.  
The income for the total food and beverage service regularly 
maintained on school premises shall accrue to the school food 
services program to be used solely for the operation or 
improvement of such service. This shall include the income from 
the sale of a la carte foods and beverages and vending machines, 
managed by the Food and Nutrition Services Department. Food 
sales operated for profit (this includes bake and candy sales) shall 
not operate during the regular school day. 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 9 of 10 
 
Food items allowed for sale:  
The sale of a la carte foods shall be restricted to those items 
recognized as contributing to or permitted to be served as part of 
the breakfast or lunch. This restriction automatically eliminates 
the sale of candy, carbonated beverages, etc. Fundraising 
activities can only operate after school hours. 
Vending machines:  
603 CMR 29.01 Non-Profit Lunch Program/Use of Vending 
Machines: Vending machines are not to be in use during school 
hours.  
Canteen services at school site locations: 
603 CMR 29.05 Competitive Foods: 
Federal regulations prevent the sale of candy, gum, and 
carbonated beverages to students on school premises from the 
beginning of the school day to the end of the last lunch period.  
The sale of food items from canteen trucks, school stores or other 
areas that compete with school meals, time, and money is in 
violation of federal regulations. These sales further divert income 
essential to the financial wellbeing of the Food and Nutrition 
Services program.  
► Use of canteen services on school premises by students 
should be prohibited. 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 10 of 10 
 
CATERING SPECIAL FUNCTIONS AND FIELD TRIPS 
Special function considerations: 
● Schools planning special activities should contact the 
cafeteria manager/satellite attendant AND Office of Food 
and Nutrition Services with advance notice of the event. A 
written request for use of the cafeteria facility or hiring of 
personnel must be made in writing at least 7 days before 
the event.  
● Food and supplies or cooking utensils will not be 
provided free of charge. Schools requesting such services 
will be charged a fee to cover costs.  
● All evening and weekend functions will require hiring 
Food Services staff at an overtime rate. All costs must be 
paid prior to the date of the event. Credit will be given if 
the event is canceled with 48 hours’ notice. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Deputy Director 
Department: 
Food and Nutrition Services 
Mailing Address: 
370 Columbia Road, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9158 
Fax: 
617-635-9304 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular  
NUMBER: 
HRS-HS02  
Version 01 
  
 
  
JOB SHARING FOR PERMANENT TEACHERS AND 
PARAPROFESSIONALS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The Office of Human Resources accepts job-sharing applications 
through the online forms included in this circular. Please note 
that employees will be required to sign in with their Boston 
Public Schools Gmail account. These links will also be made 
available through BTU and paraprofessional representatives, the 
Boston Public Schools website, and the Superintendent’s 
Bulletin. 
Boston Public Schools has agreed to provide job-sharing 
opportunities to permanent educators (1) and paraprofessionals 
who desire to split a position with another staff member in their 
building. 
CONDITIONS FOR JOB SHARING 
The following are the conditions under which employees are 
permitted to share jobs: 
 
1() This includes nurses, COSE, and other BTU educators with 
permanent status. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS02 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
 
1. Participation in job sharing requires approval by the 
principal//head of school. The principal/head of school 
should submit their approval to the Office of Human 
Resources via the online form below.  
2. All participants in the job-sharing program will be required 
to jointly plan their program so as to provide programmatic 
integrity and continuity. The principal/head of school must 
approve such plans.  
With the approval of the principal/head of school, teachers 
or paraprofessionals may structure their program in the 
following two options: 
a. Both teach for one-half day 
b. Both teach for one-half week 
► Job share participants may not split the school year 
with their job share partner in order to work for only 
half of the school year. Job share participants also 
may not split the teaching bimonthly or biweekly.  
3. All participants in the job-sharing program will be required 
to attend all "Early Release Time" in-service meetings, all 
professional days, and parent conferences. If the job share 
takes place in a designated Extended Learning Time school, 
both teachers/paraprofessionals are expected to participate 
in ELT. 
4. The two teachers participating in a joint assignment/job 
sharing will meet with one another once each marking 
period, at the discretion of the principal/head of school, to 
assess and improve the job sharing program. These 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS02 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
 
meetings may be held on early release or professional 
development days. 
All parties recognize that at times it may be necessary for 
the two teachers and the principal/head of school to meet 
for the purpose of addressing problems which may arise in 
the implementation of job sharing at an individual school. 
Such meetings, if necessary, shall be scheduled at a time 
that is mutually agreeable to all parties. 
5. Teachers and paraprofessionals participating in the job-
sharing program will receive the following compensation 
and benefits: 
a. Compensation shall be one-half of salary entitlement. 
b. Sick leave shall be one-half of annual entitlement. 
c. Personal days shall be one-half of annual entitlement. 
d. Health insurance premium and health and welfare fund: 
full contribution 
e. Seniority accrual: full credit 
f. Attachment rights for one-year to former position 
6. Teachers participating in job-sharing must hold a valid DESE 
license for the position. No exceptions will be made.  
7. Each participant in the job-sharing program will be asked to 
enter into a binding agreement committing to the year-long 
assignment. 
8. Participants must submit new job-sharing applications each 
year. Continuation of a job-sharing pairing for the next 
academic school year will be subject to a favorable review 
by all parties. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS02 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
 
TO INDICATE INTEREST IN JOB SHARING 
Permanent teachers or paraprofessionals who wish to indicate 
their interest in job sharing should submit a request using the 
online form shown below. The submission of an application only 
serves an indication of interest and is not binding. The application 
must be submitted via the online form no later than 5:00 p.m. on 
March 25, 2025. 
Please note: Applicants are responsible for making all job-sharing 
arrangements, including finding a colleague with whom to job-
share. The Office of Human Resources does not assist with 
making job-sharing arrangements. If you are unable to find a 
partner, your request to job share will be denied. 
2024-25 ONLINE FORMS 
The Office of Human Resources now accepts job-sharing 
applications online. Candidate applications for job share as well 
as principal/head of school approval can be submitted through 
the links below. Please note that employees will be required to 
sign in with their Boston Public Schools Gmail account. These 
links will also be made available through BTU and 
paraprofessional representatives, the Boston Public Schools 
website, and the Superintendent’s Bulletin.  
Job Sharing Request: 
Applicant Form 
Each applicant interested in Job Sharing 
must submit their own form by March 
25, 2025. Principals/heads of schools 
must submit the form below for 
approval. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS02 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
 
Job Sharing Request: 
Principal Approval 
Form 
Principals/heads of schools must submit 
this form to approve a job share request 
by April 15, 2025.  
 
FOR MORE INFORMATION ABOUT JOB SHARING 
There will be an informal meeting at the Boston Teachers Union 
in Winter 2025 for teachers and paraprofessionals who are 
interested in obtaining more information about job sharing.  
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
School-Based Staffing 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources  
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Additional 
Questions: 
Please submit an HR Inquiry Ticket via 
the Beacon. This can be found on Access 
Boston. 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
FSE-07 
Version 01 
 
 
 
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WORKPLACE SAFETY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
BACKGROUND 
In the past, concerns have been raised over the potential use of 
the U.S. Postal Service to conduct bioterrorist activity. In both 
New York and in Washington D.C., contents of three or four 
envelopes were tested positive for anthrax. In those cases where 
positive results were recorded, public health authorities dealt 
with this issue. 
The purpose of this memorandum is to provide guidelines for the 
handling of mail in the Boston Public Schools. In providing these 
guidelines, it is important to note that we have been informed by 
the Boston Public Health Commission that there have been no 
confirmed anthrax cases reported in either the Boston Public 
Schools or in the City of Boston.  
Your School Emergency Operations Guide (flip chart) will serve as 
an action reference on this subject. 
GUIDELINES 
The following guidelines are effective immediately and shall 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-07 
Page 2 of 9 
 
 
remain in place until otherwise ordered: 
1. Every responsibility center should assign one person and a 
backup person to sort and distribute mail. That person shall 
be supplied with rubber gloves and plastic bags to be used 
at their discretion. Training in the safe handling of mail will 
be provided. 
2. Techniques for safe handling of routine mail include the 
following: 
a. Examine all mail before opening to determine if it is 
suspicious. 
b. Isolate suspicious mail in a plastic bag. 
c. Open mail with a letter opener over a hard cleanable 
surface, holding the envelope upright so that the 
contents will not spill out. 
d. Examine the inside contents prior to removal. 
e. Never shake or wave any mail or contents of 
letters/packages. 
f. Ensure that food or drinks are not in the area while 
mail is handled. 
3. All mail and packages sent to internal offices/departments 
through the courier service should be sealed by the sender 
and the name and return address of the sending office 
clearly marked on the envelope/package. 
4. Characteristics of suspicious letters and packages include 
the following: 
a. No return address. 
b. Return address not matching city/state on the 
postmark. 
c. Stained, discolored mail or mail with an odor. 
d. Excessive postage/excessive weight. 
e. Lopsided or uneven envelope/packaging. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-07 
Page 3 of 9 
 
 
f. Improper address, illegible or poorly written address. 
g. Mail with visual threats on packaging materials. 
h. Unexpected mail with an international postmark. 
i. Ticking sound. 
j. Any combination of the aforementioned 
characteristics. 
5. Suspicious mail or packages should NOT be opened or 
jostled. It should be placed in a plastic bag and isolated for 
inspection by the responsibility center manager. 
6. If suspicious mail is already opened, it should be left on the 
desk/table and should NOT be handled further. It is 
suggested that it be covered with a plastic trash bag and 
the immediate area closed off. Refer to items 8 and 9 and 
follow the procedures outlined. 
7. If any powder or suspicious substance spills out of the 
envelope, cover it, close off and leave the immediate area, 
wash your hands with soap and water and notify your 
responsibility center manager. 
8. When suspicious mail has been received, the responsibility 
center manager should call 911 and notify the 
Superintendent's Office. Our protocol does not call for 
evacuation of the building unless so directed by public 
safety officials. 
9. All persons who handled suspicious letters/packages should 
wash their hands with soap and water. 
Attached for informational and review purposes are public health 
fact sheets prepared by the Boston Public Health Commission. 
Please keep this memorandum available for reference. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-07 
Page 4 of 9 
 
 
ATTACHMENT A 
 
PUBLIC HEALTH FACT SHEET 
Communicable Disease Control 
1010 Massachusetts Ave, Boston MA 02118 
617-534-5611 
ANTHRAX 
What is anthrax? 
Anthrax is a disease caused by a bacterium called Bacillus 
anthracis. Anthrax most commonly occurs in animals, but it can 
also infect people. Anthrax has the potential to be used as a 
biological weapon. In late 2001, terrorism related Anthrax cases 
were found in Connecticut, New York City, New Jersey, Florida, 
and Washington DC.  
How is anthrax spread? 
Anthrax can be spread by touching it (when there’s a cut on the 
skin), breathing it in, or eating meat contaminated with Anthrax. 
It is not contagious. An infected person cannot give it to others. 
What are the symptoms of anthrax? 
Symptoms of the disease vary depending on how the disease 
was contracted, and usually occur within 7 days, but can take up 
to 60 days to appear.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-07 
Page 5 of 9 
 
 
• Cutaneous (skin form): Most anthrax infections occur when 
bacteria enter the skin. The infection begins as a raised itchy 
bump that resembles an insect bite, but within several days 
develops into a blister. The blister ulcerates and forms a 
black area in the center. With prompt treatment, the vast 
majority of people recover fully.  
• Inhalation: Initial symptoms may resemble the flu with 
fever, chills, and muscle aches. After several days, the 
symptoms progress to severe breathing problems and 
shock. In the past, death occurred 1-2 days after the onset of 
symptoms. However, during the recent outbreak of anthrax 
in the United States, with prompt treatment more than half 
of the people who developed inhalation anthrax survived.  
• Intestinal: This form of anthrax occurs from eating 
contaminated meat. Symptoms include nausea, loss of 
appetite, vomiting, fever, and are followed by abdominal 
pain, vomiting of blood, and severe diarrhea.  
Can I acquire anthrax from another person? 
Person-to-person spread of anthrax is not known to occur. Only 
people directly exposed to anthrax spores could develop disease. 
Is there an anthrax vaccine? 
There is a limited amount of anthrax vaccine available in the 
United States; however, most people are not routinely vaccinated 
against anthrax unless they fall into a high-risk group such as 
military personnel. The anthrax vaccine requires 6 shots over a 
period of 18 months with follow-up shots. Anthrax vaccines 
intended for animals should not be used in humans.  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-07 
Page 6 of 9 
 
 
Is there a treatment for anthrax? 
Doctors can prescribe antibiotics that work against anthrax. To 
be effective, treatment should be initiated early. If left untreated, 
the disease can be fatal. In Massachusetts, all cases of suspected 
anthrax are required to be reported immediately to local health 
departments. In Boston, suspected cases should be reported to 
Boston Public Health Commission at 617-534-5611. 
For more information call the BPHC Bioterrorism Information 
Line at 617-534-2362 or visit http://www.bphc.org 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-07 
Page 7 of 9 
 
 
ATTACHMENT B 
 
PUBLIC HEALTH FACT SHEET 
Communicable Disease Control 
1010 Massachusetts Ave, Boston MA 02118 
617-534-5611 
 
BIOTERRORISM 
What is Bioterrorism?  
Bioterrorism is a form of terrorism in which infectious biological 
agents, such as bacteria, viruses, or toxins are used (or are 
threatened to be used) against another person to create fear and 
disrupt normal daily activities. Use or threatened use of such 
agents is a Federal crime and is thoroughly investigated by the 
Boston Police Department, FBI, and other agencies. 
What is the Boston Public Health Commission doing to prepare 
for a possible bioterrorist event?  
The Boston Public Health Commission (BPHC) has been 
preparing for potential bioterrorism for several years. BPHC has 
been working with health care providers and others in the city to 
develop an early warning system for possible bioterrorist attacks. 
This system will allow city officials time to implement steps to 
prevent further illness. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-07 
Page 8 of 9 
 
 
How will I know if I have been exposed to an infectious 
biological agent?  
Most bioterrorist threats to date have been hoaxes, so often 
people only think they have been exposed to a bioterrorist agent. 
If you suspect you have been exposed to a biological agent, notify 
emergency personnel immediately by calling 911. Boston Police, 
Fire, Emergency Medical Services, and Public Health Commission 
will work together to collect and identify the suspect material.  
If I actually were exposed to an infectious biological agent, what 
symptoms should I look for?  
Different viruses, bacteria, and toxins may be used as 
bioterrorism agents, and each may cause different symptoms. 
Often however, they resemble either the flu or food poisoning. 
People who are exposed may experience fever, chills, headache, 
body aches, and muscle weakness. Others may experience 
coughing, diarrhea, abdominal cramping, nausea, and vomiting. 
It is important to remember that these symptoms are common 
of many illnesses and are not usually the result of bioterrorist 
events. 
How long would it take for symptoms to appear?  
The length of time it takes for symptoms to appear can vary 
greatly depending on the type of agent used. Symptoms can 
appear between several hours to several weeks after exposure.  
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-07 
Page 9 of 9 
 
 
What can be done if I am exposed to a biological agent?  
For many of these agents, treatment is available. However, it is 
very important for treatment to begin early. Therefore, if you 
suspect you may have been exposed to one of these agents, see a 
health care provider as soon as possible.  
 For more information call the BPHC Bioterrorism Information 
Line at 617-534-2362 or visit the Boston Public Health 
Commission, http://www.bphc.org. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Emergency Management and 
Preparedness 
Department: Safety & Emergency Management 
Mailing 
Address: 
205 Townsend Street Boston, MA 02121 
Phone: 
(857) 701-9404 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER:  
FSE-08 
Version 01 
 
 
  
SAFE MODE AND INTERNAL THREAT PROCEDURES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Mandatory SAFE MODE drills are to be planned, conducted and 
reviewed during September and January of each school year. Each 
school should conduct two SAFE MODE drills every year. These 
exercises are to be coordinated through your school superintendents. 
A report on each safe mode drill must be documented on the Google 
form, which can be found at the BPS Fire & Safety Drill Report.  If you 
have any questions, please contact the BPS Office of Emergency 
Management. 
 
These drills will help prepare the school community for any real life 
situation that may occur. 
 
During any real-life situation:  
● Call 911 as soon as you can do so safely.   
● Call the Department of Safety Services at 617-635-8000, after 
calling 911, if you can do so safely. 
  
Objectives of SAFE MODE drills: 
● Staff will be able to describe what SAFE MODE is and their 
responsibilities during a SAFE MODE event. 
● Staff will have the opportunity to have their questions 
concerning SAFE MODE heard and answered. 


Page 2:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 2 of 13 
 
● Staff will have the opportunity to raise potential concerns that 
have not yet been addressed to assist in better anticipating 
issues during SAFE MODE  situations. 
 
DEFINITIONS AND PROTOCOL FOR ACTUAL EVENTS 
  
SAFE MODE (External Threat) 
SAFE MODE is a protective action used to safeguard faculty, staff, 
and students from an external threat as a result of law enforcement 
activity near the school or a potentially dangerous situation near the 
school. Schools will typically be placed into SAFE MODE by the 
Boston Police Department or BPS Safety Services, but each school 
can enter SAFE MODE on its own.  
 
Examples of reasons why schools go into SAFE MODE:  
● Police activity around or near your building  
● Shooting outside your building  
● Fire or accident near your building  
 
How will you know when you are in SAFE MODE? 
The Principal/Head of School, Site Coordinator or designee will 
announce the following via intercom and/or using the school safety 
team: 
 
"Attention faculty and students: We are now in SAFE MODE. 
Remain in your classroom. If you are in the hallway, stairs, or 
lavatory, move into the nearest classroom. Do not leave the room 
until told to do so, even if an alarm sounds." 
 


Page 3:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 3 of 13 
 
NOTE: The Principal/Head of School, Site Coordinator or designee 
will also be alerting Safety Services and calling 911 to alert them 
that they are in SAFE MODE if not a drill, as mentioned above. 
  
What should faculty and staff do upon notification of SAFE MODE? 
1. If you see, hear, or observe a potential threat outside your 
building, bring all students and staff back into the building 
immediately and initiate SAFE MODE and notifications.  
2. Depending on the circumstances and the direction of the 
Principal/Head of School, Site Coordinator or their designee, 
learning activities may continue during a SAFE MODE. If 
continuing learning activities, be sure the volume in the room 
is low enough to hear further announcements.  
3. Check the hallways for people nearby and bring them into the 
classroom. 
4. Check adjacent classrooms through interior doors for 
unsupervised students. 
5. Lock the classroom door. 
6. Be prepared to barricade your doors, cover large door windows 
using any available resources (e.g., large paper or felt), and close 
the windows and shades (if you have them). Turn the lights off 
and silence cell phones, radios, Tv and any other source of noise 
as necessary.  
7. Be prepared to move students away from windows and doors 
and stay in your  safe location. 
8. Take attendance. Verify the missing and extra people in your 
room. Write the names on a sheet of paper and wait for 
someone to contact you for that list (may be by intercom or in 
person). 


Page 4:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 4 of 13 
 
9.  Ramain with your students in the classroom until further 
instructions are given. 
10.  Only use the intercom to notify the main office of emergencies 
or special needs. 
11. SAFE MODE ends only when the principal/head of school, site 
coordinator or designee announces it via intercom or through 
door to door notifications. 
  
What will the safety team be doing during SAFE MODE? 
1. Administration will make sure exterior doors are locked. 
2. Floor captains will check classrooms and lock bathrooms. 
3. Administration will notify all staff via the public address system 
of the situation. 
4. Administration will notify Safety Services and their school 
superintendent if they are in an actual SAFE MODE. They will 
notify their school superintendent if they will be conducting a 
SAFE MODE drill. 
5. Administration or police will monitor cameras. 
6. Administration or police will monitor the entire school to make 
sure no one is in the hallways or leaving or entering the 
building. 
7. Administration will work with BPS Communications to send a 
notice to all families within a short time after the incident when 
the situation is clear. 
 
Preventative Safe Mode: This version of SAFE MODE can be used to 
stop motion in the building under certain circumstances to resolve 
an internal issue (e.g., lost children, student/adult behavior, K9 
search, etc.). 
 


Page 5:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 5 of 13 
 
How will you know when you are in PREVENTATIVE SAFE MODE? 
The Principal/Head of School, Site Coordinator or designee will 
announce the following via intercom and/or using the school safety 
team: 
 
"Attention faculty and students: We are now in PREVENTATIVE SAFE 
MODE. Remain in your classroom. If you are in the hallway, stairs, or 
lavatory, move into the nearest classroom. Do not leave the room 
until told to do so, even if an alarm sounds." 
 
If schools want to conduct internal threats drills, they should only do 
so with staff. No students should be involved in an internal threat 
drill.  If there are concerns about these drills or procedures, they 
should only be discussed with staff.   
 
INTERNAL THREAT (Interior) 
INTERNAL THREAT will be announced if there is any person in the 
building who is looking to cause harm to people.  If an internal threat 
is in the building, all occupants should use the AVOID, DENY, 
DEFEND (formerly RUN, HIDE, FIGHT) model to protect themselves 
and anyone in their care. During this situation, occupants should use 
their own judgment to determine what they will do.  
 
Examples of an INTERNAL THREAT are:  
● Unknown  or unidentified  people in your building wandering 
around  
● Out of control parent/family member 
● Person with a weapon in the building  
● Person shooting in your building  
 


Page 6:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 6 of 13 
 
 
How will I know when we have an INTERNAL THREAT? 
The Principal/Head of School, Site Coordinator or designee will 
announce the following via the school intercom (and call 911 if not a 
drill): 
 
“Attention faculty and students:  there is an INTERNAL THREAT 
(AVOID, DENY, DEFEND).” 
 
What will be happening on campus during an INTERNAL THREAT 
situation? 
1. No one will be in hallways.  
2. Anyone with information on the threat should be calling 911 to 
alert police of the situation. 
3. Occupants will be using the AVOID, DENY, DEFEND protocol 
to decide their actions:  
● AVOID (RUN) pay attention to your surroundings, know 
your exits if you know it is safe to do so: get as far away 
from the building or source of threat as you can (you should 
not be able to see the building/threat from where you have 
run to).  If it is safe to do, call 911, call the School Leader and 
Safety Services at 617-635-8000. Cautiously alert people 
around you if possible.  
● DENY (HIDE) if you cannot run: barricade where you are (if 
you can) and stay out of sight of the threat,lock the door, 
turn off the light. Silence your phone, radios, tv and/or any 
other source of noise.  
● DEFEND (FIGHT) If you cannot Avoid or Deny  be prepared 
to defend yourself. If fighting is your last resort and the 
threat is in your space and is going to hurt you or people 


Page 7:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 7 of 13 
 
you are with, find something to fight (laptop, chair, fire 
extinguisher or any other available resources).   
All staff should consider what to do during an internal threat on a 
regular basis. HAVE A PLAN! 
 
HELPFUL HINTS:  “KNOW YOUR SPACE” 
● Know all available egress (EXIT) points if you ever need to 
AVOID (RUN). 
● Know what you can use to barricade your door(s) and conceal 
yourself from sight if you ever need to DENY (HIDE). 
● Know what you can use to DEFEND (FIGHT) if fighting is your 
only option (fire extinguisher, chair, laptop, etc.).  
● The goal of both SAFE MODE and INTERNAL THREAT is to take 
cover and conceal yourself and your students from the active 
assailant. Covering glass (with large paper, shades, etc), 
shutting off lights, staying quiet (silence your phone, radios, 
TV or any other source of noise) and moving into a position of 
concealment is key. 
 
 
POLICE RESPONSE: “KNOW WHAT TO EXPECT” 
● Law enforcement priorities:  
1. Neutralize the shooter   
2. Stop the bleed of the first critical victim they encounter 
(only if the shooter is not in the immediate location. This is 
a new protocol.) 
● When police arrive, follow their commands, show the palms of 
your hands, don’t move quickly. 
● BPD policy is that plainclothes officers can respond to an active 
assailant, help may not be in uniform.  


Page 8:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 8 of 13 
 
 
 
DEFINITIONS AND PROTOCOL FOR SAFE MODE DRILLS  
 
How to conduct a Safe Mode Drill at your school? 
 
Identify a Safety Team if you have not already done so (Refer to 
Safety Contingency Plan FSE-01). This Safety Team should include 
the School Leader, Assistant School Leader, Site Coordinator, 
Secretary, Custodian or designees. Please review FSE-01 page 24 
for guidance.  
 
The Principal/School Leader, Site Coordinator or designee must 
ensure that staff receive and understand proper instructions on 
the safe mode drill procedure. Students should also be informed 
of the procedure in order to align expectations prior to the drill. 
The drill must be recorded on this form.  
 
Prior to the Drill:  
Confirm the Plan: School Leader/Site Coordinators or designee 
will review the Safe Mode and Internal Threat Procedures, 
including the various situations and levels of Safe Mode (ie 
external threat/ medical issue/ internal threat) with staff. Select 
the date of the drill and coordinate roles and responsibilities 
during and after the drill. 
 
Day of the drill:  
Just in Time Training: School Leaders/Site Coordinators or 
designee  will instruct staff to review Safe Mode and Internal 
Threat Procedures ensuring everyone knows their roles 


Page 9:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 9 of 13 
 
(Students/Staff). Also staff should confirm window covers are 
available (shades/blinds/paper/boards, etc) and classroom doors 
can lock properly from the exterior. Familiarize yourself with the 
system used to warn you to go into Safe Mode, this may be the 
public address system, if available, an intercom system, phones 
or radios. If the only method to communicate within the school 
is the bell system, note the warning bell system used to warn 
everyone to Safe Mode. 
*Listen carefully for instructions* 
Conducting Safe Mode Drill: 
1. Inject: Safe Mode ANNOUNCEMENT is made via the PA, with 
the support of radios to areas where the PA does not reach. 
2. Staff and students go inside the building into the nearest 
classroom immediately if they are not already.  
3. Staff check the hallways for other staff/students nearby and 
bring them into the classroom.  
4. Staff check adjacent classrooms through interior doors for 
unsupervised students.  
5. Lock the classroom doors. 
6. Close and lock the windows. 
7. Be prepared to barricade your doors, cover large door windows 
using any available resources (e.g., large paper or felt), and 
close the windows and shades (if you have them).  
8. Move students away from windows and doors and stay in your 
current location.  
9. CONDUCT AN ACCOUNTABILITY SURVEY Verify the missing 
and extra people in your room. Write the names on a sheet of 
paper and wait for someone to contact you for that list (may 
be by intercom or in person). 


Page 10:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 10 of 13 
 
10.  Stay with your students in the classroom until further 
instructions are given.  
11. Only use the intercom to notify the main office of emergencies 
or special needs.  
12. Silence all cellular devices. 
13. Shut off the lights.  
 
IF THE FIRE ALARM SYSTEM SOUNDS:  
● Evacuate if there are visible signs of fire.  
● Await instructions if there are no signs of fire.  
 
14.  ALL CLEAR/ RETURN TO SCHOOL 
School Leader, Assistant School Leader, Site Coordinator, 
Secretary, Custodian or designee announces ALL CLEAR via 
intercom or through door to door notifications. 
Action: Staff return to normal classroom activities. 
15.  School Leader, Site Coordinator or designee reports the drill 
on this form. If you have any problem with this link, please 
contact the OEM Team for assistance.  
 
Note: Learning activities may continue during a SAFE MODE drill, 
unless you are instructed otherwise by the Principal/School Leader, 
Site Coordinator or designee. If continuing learning activities, be 
sure the volume in the room is low enough to hear further 
announcements. 
 
IMPORTANT REMINDER:  The BPS Office of Emergency 
Management is available to support schools drills as well as 
facilitating tabletop exercises or functional tests of school buildings 
plans and protocol. Please contact us for more information. 
 


Page 11:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 11 of 13 
 
All staff should view the following video from the Ohio State 
University, to obtain important additional information that will be 
helpful in the event that an incident occurs at the school or another 
location. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Emergency Management and 
Preparedness 
Department: Safety & Emergency Management 
Mailing 
Address: 
205 Townsend Street Boston, MA 02121 
Phone: 
(857) 701-9404 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Updated 7.29.2024)


Page 12:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 12 of 13 
 
BPS Safe Mode Announcement Scripts (English) 
Safe Mode (External Threat/ Danger Outside of the School) 
Announcement:  
"Attention faculty and students: We are now in SAFE MODE. Remain in your classroom.  
If you are in the hallway, stairs, or lavatory, move into the nearest classroom.  
Do not leave the room until told to do so, even if an alarm sounds." 
 
Preventative Safe Mode (ex. Missing Student/ Medical Emergency) 
Announcement:  
"Attention faculty and students: We are now in PREVENTATIVE SAFE MODE.  
Remain in your classroom. If you are in the hallway, stairs, or lavatory, move into the nearest classroom.  
Do not leave the room until told to do so, even if an alarm sounds." 
 
Internal Threat (Active Shooter/ Armed Intruder Inside) 
Announcement:  
“Attention faculty and students: there is an INTERNAL THREAT (Avoid, Deny, Defend).” 
 
Know Your Space. Get Safe Before You Call 911. 
Cover versus Concealment. 
Silence is Golden. 
BPS Office of Emergency Management updated 7/2024                      


Page 13:
 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-08 
Page 13 of 13 
 
BPS Guía para anunciar el “modo seguro”(Spanish) 
Modo seguro (amenaza externa/peligro fuera de la escuela) 
Anuncio: 
"Atención profesores y estudiantes: ahora estamos en MODO SEGURO. Permanezcan en su salón de 
clases. Si está en el pasillo, las escaleras o el baño, diríjase al salón de clases más cercano. No salga 
del salón  hasta que se le indique, incluso si suena una alarma". 
 
Modo seguro preventivo (por ejemplo, estudiante desaparecido/emergencia médica) 
Anuncio: 
"Atención profesores y estudiantes: Ahora estamos en MODO SEGURO PREVENTIVO. Permanezca 
en su salón de clases. Si está en el pasillo, las escaleras o el baño, diríjase al salón de clases más 
cercano. No salga del salón hasta que se le indique, incluso si suena una alarma". 
 
Amenaza interna (tirador activo/intruso armado en el interior) 
Anuncio: 
“Atención profesores y estudiantes: hay una AMENAZA INTERNA (Evita, Deniega, Defiendete).” 
Conozca su espacio. 
Antes de llamar al 911, asegúrese de no estar en peligro (busque un lugar seguro con precaución) 
El silencio es oro. 
 
Oficina de Manejo de Emergencia de BPS 7/2024                      


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FSE-01 
Version 01 
 
 
 
SCHOOL SAFETY CONTINGENCY PLANS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Emergencies happen randomly in time and place, but they can be 
handled efficiently if you have an adequate school action plan and 
an informed staff.  A plan without a crisis is better than a crisis 
without a plan.  School administrators and staff routinely manage 
crises efficiently, and a well thought out plan will ensure guidance 
in a major emergency. 
Boston Public Schools is a NIMS (National Incident Management 
System) compliance district.  NIMS uses a core set of concepts, 
principals, procedures, processes, standards, and terminology that 
may all be integrated with school emergency management 
practices.  This in part means that we use straight language and 
not codes when emergencies happen.   
When developing safety plans, school administrators must 
consider mitigation/prevention, response and aftermath, and 
components which apply to all emergency preparedness. 
Prevention/mitigation 
strategies 
are 
delineated 
in 
related 
Superintendent’s Circulars.  Appropriate response will be detailed 
in your School Safety Contingency Plan.  Dealing with recovery will 
be addressed via Special Education and Student Services policies 
and procedures and support from other BPS departments. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 2 of 42 
 
 
It is essential that there be a consistent approach to school safety 
planning throughout the district.  This will ensure that each school 
implements standard procedures in the event of an incident.  A 
defined course of action will also complement the efforts of 
responding public safety agencies. 
The issue of school safety planning is regularly assessed.  Ongoing 
risk analyses are conducted, and lessons learned from actual and 
most probable school incidents are integrated with BPS safety 
protocols.  Although every possible contingency may not be 
identified in BPS School Safety contingency plan guidelines, your 
plan should serve as a multi-hazard approach for handling school 
incidents. 
It is the responsibility of each school administrative head to 
update, review with staff and submit their School Safety 
Contingency Plan no later than the last week of August each 
school year. 
The names of those schools which fail to comply with this directive 
are forwarded to the Superintendent’s Office for appropriate 
action.  
Your School Safety Contingency Plan is to be completed in the 
Google doc shared with the school principal/head of school. Please 
use the original doc to complete your plan. Do not copy and 
share. It will be automatically saved. You are allowed continuous 
access to maintain its currency.  It is also accessible to the 
Superintendent’s Office staff and other appropriate BPS central 
departments.  Boston public safety agencies — police, fire, EMS 
and BOEM — have access to these plans in an emergency. The 
Office of Emergency Management and Preparedness is available 
as a resource to assist principals/schools leaders, heads of school 
and other administrative heads with access information and 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 3 of 42 
 
 
technical advice in order to complete their plans.  
INSTRUCTIONS FOR UPDATING AND EDITING SCHOOL SAFETY 
CONTINGENCY PLANS AND FIRE SAFETY PLANS 
The following is information on how to access and edit your 
building’s School Safety Contingency Plan and the building’s Fire 
Safety Plan. The actual School Safety Contingency Plan for your 
building was shared with you by the Director of the Office of 
Emergency Management and Preparedness or Director of 
Technology in a Google Doc. Use this Google Doc for all changes 
and updates.  Please make all changes in the original doc. Do not 
save and make changes.   
► If you cannot locate your plan, please contact The Office of 
Emergency Management and Preparedness Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org.  
 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
Last Week in August 
Deadline for completion and submission on Google 
Doc to The Director of the Office of Emergency 
Management and Preparedness of revised School 
Safety Contingency Plan and review same with 
staff for this school year.   
 
SECTION I: INTRODUCTION 
The Boston Public Schools continues efforts to simplify and 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 4 of 42 
 
 
standardize school safety plans throughout the system.  It is 
understood that each school has its own “safety personality” based 
on its construction design, location, number of staff, number and 
grade level of students, as well as many other characteristics.  
However, there are common elements, policies, and procedures 
for all schools to follow in the event of an incident/crisis. 
There are five phases of emergency management for school 
administrators to consider when developing safety plans:  
● Mitigation 
● Prevention 
● Preparedness  
● Response  
● Recovery 
Although special emphasis is placed on spectacular and unusual 
incidents by the media, there are many routine types of school 
related occurrences that can also be extremely disruptive to a 
school. 
School administrators are called upon to deal with these 
emergencies on a regular basis.  In every type of school incident, 
the first responders and decision makers are school-based staff. 
When the scope of an incident escalates beyond the resources 
available at the school, initial actions taken or not taken by those 
closest to the event can help or hinder those who will arrive later 
and assume responsibility for resolving the situation. 
The intent of these guidelines is to assist school administrators in 
creating an appropriate working plan that will direct them 
through a crisis and expedite the return of their school to its 
normal operation following that crisis. It is a multi-hazard 
approach to school incident management. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 5 of 42 
 
 
BPS guidelines are based on concepts utilized in an Incident 
Command System developed by public safety agencies across the 
nation.  The following is a brief overview of the Incident Command 
System. 
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 
ICS has been modified for our application on the school level to 
manage any incident/crisis within our capacity and maintain 
compatibility 
with 
supplementary 
public 
safety 
agency’s 
emergency plans. 
In managing any incident/crisis, the paramount objectives for all 
school staff are to: 
● Ensure safety of all occupants 
● Follow BPS Safety Plan, Safe Mode and/or Fire protocol 
● Stabilize and resolve the incident when possible 
● Provide support for responding public safety agencies (911 
and BPS Dispatch 617-635-8000) 
● Protect school property 
The Incident Command System (ICS) is based on a team concept, 
where each team member has specific responsibilities.  BPS will 
utilize an on-site team and an off-site team that will focus on 
securing the necessary support from internal departments and 
external agencies.  The information flow is illustrated on the next 
page. 
The on-site BPS Incident Control team (ICT) team model calls for 
the following positions: 
Site Incident Control Team  
● Site Incident Control manager (SICM) 
● Risk analyst 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 6 of 42 
 
 
● Safety coordinator 
● Building coordinator 
● Incident scribe 
The roles, responsibilities and required skills for a successful Site 
Incident Control Team follow: 
Site Incident Control Manager  
Generally, the site incident control manager (SICM) should be the 
head of school/principal/director, the individual who has ultimate 
responsibility for his/her school’s operation.  The SICM must have 
a clear understanding of the school system’s policies and 
procedures.  The SICM must also be able to make quality 
assessments, communicate well and command others.  These are 
normal functions for a school’s administrator to perform. 
Depending on the severity and tier level of the incident, the SICM 
will establish a command post at a designated location and 
activate the school’s internal team.  The nature of the incident 
determines the configuration of the team.  In a large-scale 
incident, the team can be expanded or collapsed as conditions 
warrant. In a smaller school, one person may perform several tasks.   
It must be understood that, initially, the SICM may be any member 
of your staff who discovers or is alerted to an incident prior to 
notification of the head of school/principal/director. 
Risk Analyst 
The risk analyst will be relied on to assess incurred injuries and 
evaluate medical risks associated with developing and occurring 
incidents.  Recommended personnel for this role include the 
school 
nurse, 
school 
psychologist, 
and 
student 
support 
coordinator.  Consideration of a school’s language requirements 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 7 of 42 
 
 
should also be included in selection of the risk analyst. 
Safety Coordinator  
The safety coordinator will be called upon to gather occupancy 
information and to support efforts to establish control at the 
incident site.  Recommended personnel for this role include 
School Registrar, School Police Officer, Safety Paraprofessional, 
Dean of Discipline, and Transportation Coordinator.  Since schools 
vary in size and range of staff, Principals and Headmasters are 
urged to explore their building’s total resources to assist in 
identifying this team member. 
Building Coordinator  
The building coordinator will meet and direct responding 
agencies to appropriate locations.  The building coordinator will 
also assess building security.  Due to familiarity and knowledge of 
the assigned school and its systems, the senior building custodian 
is the suggested primary designee for this role. 
Incident Scribe 
The incident scribe will be responsible for documenting the 
chronology 
of 
events. 
 
This 
position 
will 
require 
good 
organizational skills and willingness to support the rest of the on-
site Incident Control Team members.  Suggested staff includes the 
school secretary or the person in your building responsible for 
organizing student arrival and dismissal.   
Smaller schools with limited numbers of administrators or support 
staff may find it necessary to have team members perform more 
than one role. 
Classroom teachers are not recommended as potential members 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 8 of 42 
 
 
of the on-site team.  Experience indicates it is best for classroom 
teachers to remain with their assigned classes during critical 
events.  A resource guide for classroom teachers is included in the 
Emergency Response Guidelines.  
CENTRAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT  
The BPS adaptation of the Incident Command Structure will 
include the establishment of an off-site team that will support the 
efforts of the on-site team.  The components of this off-site Crisis 
Command Team will include Facilities Management, Emergency 
Management, Transportation, Superintendent’s Office, Student 
Support Services, Safety Services, and other areas that might be 
required as incidents evolve.  The external team will provide liaison 
support to any agency required by a situation.   
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 9 of 42 
 
 
Central Incident Management Team 
Group 
Primary 
Phone 
Facilities Management Executive Director of 
Facilities 
(617) 635-9126 
BPS Emergency 
Management 
Director of 
Emergency 
Management  
(857) 701-9404 
(617) 635-6082 
Transportation 
Chief of 
Transportation 
(617) 635-9520 
Behavioral Health 
Services (BHS) 
Chief of Student 
Services 
(617) 635-9676 
Safety Services 
Chief of Safety 
Services  
(617) 635-8000 
 
Superintendent’s 
Office 
Deputy Supt of 
Operations 
(617) 635-9643 
 
Office of Technology 
CIO/Director 
(617) 635-9200 
Communications  
Department 
Chief of 
Communications  
(617) 635-9265 
 
In many instances, this sophisticated level of staffing may not be 
required.  However, considering identified functions requiring 
performance in a crisis, the model ICS structure can be modified 
for a specific application to ensure completion of critical 
communications and data sharing tasks.  It is important to 
understand that the incident command system is driven by 
functions being performed and not simply staffing positions. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 10 of 42 
 
 
PUBLIC SAFETY RESPONSE 
Should an incident necessitate a response by non-school 
department public safety resources based on the assessment of 
the school SICM, they will be met by the building coordinator and 
informed of the nature of the incident and location of the school 
command post.  
Should conditions warrant, public safety personnel might assume 
primary responsibility and command.  The responding public 
safety officials may activate their own command post, at which 
time an official from the impacted school may be requested to 
take a position at that location. 
INCIDENT TYPE AND RESPONSE 
The BPS adaptation of the Incident Command System calls for 
classification of an event or developing situations to be 
categorized by the following tier level concepts.  The initial 
assessment must quickly determine if the best response is safe 
mode or evacuation. 
School related incidents will be classified according to a level of 
seriousness (Tiers I, II, III).  Appropriate school response to these 
tiers would be to initiate emergency procedures, standby or 
monitor the situation, or introduce proactive measures with 
careful monitoring of developing situations. The appropriate 
response or modes required by the SICM’s evaluation are defined 
as follows: 
Tier I – Any Situation That Requires Immediate 911 Response 
Tier II – Stand By and Response Planning Mode 
Tier III – Proactive Prevention and Monitoring Mode 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 11 of 42 
 
 
DEFINING INCIDENT RESPONSES BY TIER LEVEL 
Situations will be categorized by the Site Incident Control 
manager (SICM) as a Tier I, Tier II, or Tier III issue. 
Tier I – Presents Imminent Danger to Students, Staff, and 
Property beyond the School’s Ability to Control
● Bomb threat 
● Fire alarm 
● Armed person on or near 
site 
● Hostage situation 
● School bus accidents 
● Medical emergencies 
● Hazardous materials 
incident 
● Gas leak 
● Suicide threats 
● Fire 
● Explosion 
● Kidnapping 
● Sexual assault 
● Lost or missing children 
● Violent behavior 
● Psychiatric emergency 
● Chemical spills 
● Natural disasters
Tier II – Presents Potential Danger to Students, Staff and 
Property 
● Suicide warnings / signs of depression 
● Weather warnings 
● Environmental issues 
● Facilities failures 
● Increased gang activities 
● Communicable diseases 
● Custody issues 
Tier III – Conditions Indicate a Threatening Situation is in 
Formative Stage 
● Sexual harassment 
● Intimidating behavior 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 12 of 42 
 
 
● Increasing levels of vandalism 
● Inappropriate communications 
● Inappropriate internet use 
● Rumors 
● Other incidents that warrant further monitoring 
CRITERIA FOR DEFINING TIER LEVELS 
Tier I 
Tier I situations present imminent danger to students, staff, 
and property beyond the school’s ability to control and 
typically involve a 911 emergency response. 
Tier I situations require an immediate SICM assessment to 
determine the scope of response required, i.e., some 
situations requiring 911 response may be contained by the 
arrival of the appropriate responding 911 unit. For example, a 
relatively small laceration requiring sutures by EMS would 
not require the same scope of response as a bomb scare that 
requires evacuation of the building.   
The traditional response to emergencies that have school-
wide impact is often limited to school evacuation. These 
guidelines, in response to new dimensions in school safety, 
call for a determination by the SICM to identify if evacuation 
or safe mode is a component of the response for the situation 
at hand.  
In the Emergency Guidelines portion of this document, the 
terms Tier I – Red (Safe Mode) and Tier I – Green (Evacuation) 
are introduced to signal the SICM’s assessment to the specific 
situation at hand.   
Tier I – (Safe Mode): students and staff staying in place within 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 13 of 42 
 
 
the building is appropriate.  The safe mode may entail locking 
in place or relocation to another part of the building. 
Tier I – (Evacuation): evacuation from the building has been 
determined as the appropriate response.   
The use of the terms Tier I – Safe Mode and Tier I – Evacuation 
is limited to Tier I events.  
Please note that some Tier I (911) situations will not require 
use of the Red or Green designations; the laceration versus 
bomb scare example illustrates the distinctions that must be 
made regarding the scope of required response. The location 
of an armed person outside versus inside a building, or a 
hazardous material release near or in the school, illustrates 
the need for evaluating whether evacuation or a safe mode 
process should be implemented. 
The range of response required must be determined by the 
SICM.  The SICM determines if additional resources need to 
be activated.  The SICM also indicates if a Tier I – Evacuation 
or Tier I – Safe Mode situation exists. 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 14 of 42 
 
 
Tier II 
Tier II situations present potential danger to students, staff, 
and property. 
Tier II situations indicate that a standby and response-
planning 
mode 
is 
required.  This 
entails 
gathering 
information, developing plans, and notifying appropriate 
agencies.   
Tier II major situations could include neighborhood fires that 
potentially threaten nearby schools, or transportation 
accidents involving the transport of hazardous materials.  A 
less dramatic situation would be a power failure that might 
eventually require early dismissal or relocation of students. 
As in Tier I, the SICM determines the scope of response 
required. 
Tier III 
Tier III conditions indicate a threatening situation is 
developing. Collaboration and communication within and 
beyond the BPS support structure is required to ensure 
appropriate resources are engaged early to minimize further 
development of the threat.   
Preventative measures, including proactive engagement by 
required support functions or intervention by appropriate 
agencies during formative phases, will decrease the 
occurrence of critical incidents within our schools.  
Tier III situations are occurring daily throughout BPS schools.  
Tier III conditions encompass a broad spectrum of behavioral 
issues and involve both individuals and groups.  Many serious 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 15 of 42 
 
 
safety incidents are preceded by actions that should raise 
flags.  For example, the appearance of gang related clothing 
among students indicates the need for conversations with 
gang intervention personnel.  Suspicion of abuse or neglect, 
or the observance of depression warning signs in individuals, 
requires follow up by Student Support staff and possibly the 
engagement of external support providers.   
Tier III conditions are likely to be first observed by classroom 
teachers who become aware of behavior that warrants 
further monitoring.  
Observation and communication of Tier III situations, which 
receive prompt application of Safety Services and Student 
Support Services prevention practices and our expanded 
support resources, offer the greatest area for positive impact 
to our school safety environment.   
When members of the onsite Incident Control Team are 
informed or observe a Tier III situation, the SICM will identify 
and contact the appropriate resources. 
SECTION II: GUIDELINES 
Initial School Actions 
An individual discovering or receiving information about an 
incident will make a quick assessment and determine if an 
immediate 911 contact is required.  If the assessment indicates that 
911 supports are required, that individual should contact 911 and 
then proceed to notify the Site Incident Control manager (SICM). 
For all other situations, the SICM will make the initial assessment 
and then notify the onsite Incident Control Team (ICT) of the 
situation.  The SICM will also initiate contact with other required 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 16 of 42 
 
 
support groups as required. While awaiting the arrival of 
requested support, the SICM and ICT will use those critical minutes 
to initiate the following eight steps: 
1. Classify the tier level and determine the appropriate response 
mode: 
a. Contact 911 
b. Stand-by and response planning 
c. Proactive prevention and monitoring 
2. Implement evacuation or safe mode decision 
3. Establish communications 
4. Identify the danger zone 
5. Identify and request needed resources 
6. Open a command post 
7. Activate staging areas 
8. Compile occupancy data 
Further details for Steps 1-8 above are as follows: 
1. Classify the Tier level.                 
● Tier I:  
Any situation that requires a 911- assistance mode 
also requires that the need for an evacuation or 
containment response be assessed. 
● Tier II:  Standby and appropriate response planning mode. 
● Tier III:  Proactive / prevention and monitoring mode.  
Examples of specific tier incidents are included in the 
introduction section. 
2. Implement Evacuation or Safe Mode Procedures.   
Evacuation — Based upon assessment and policy, the SICM 
will determine the need for evacuation.  If evacuation is 
warranted, it will begin upon the communication of a 
predetermined signal (fire alarm, intercom, bell, buzzer, 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 17 of 42 
 
 
other).  All building occupants will respond to this signal and 
immediately evacuate according to prescribed routes.  
Notification procedures for Tier I – (Evacuation) should be 
entered in the computerized School Submittal Section of 
your (Step I, section d) school safety plan. 
Each school must have established primary and secondary 
evacuation routes 
to 
be followed 
during 
drills 
and 
emergencies. Evacuation routes, which are also an element 
of your Fire Safety Plan, should be inspected prior to 
utilization and the appropriate one determined during 
assessment of the situation.  
Assembly areas must also be predetermined for all school-
building occupants upon their exiting the school.  This is a 
critical time during an emergency, and student / staff 
accountability measures must be accomplished at this 
point. Evacuation may be to a primary, secondary, or to your 
off-site (alternate) location(s).  These locations require 
assessment during plan development, and at the time of the 
incident, to ensure adequacy.  This information will be 
entered in the computerized School Submittal Section (Step 
I, Section B) of your school safety plan. 
Safe Mode — Safe Mode is an alternative response to 
evacuation procedures. Notification procedures (Safe Mode) 
should be entered in the computerized School Submittal 
Section (Step I, Section D) of your school’s safety plan.  
Generally, evacuation to the outside has been our immediate 
response to an emergency signal.  Post incident analyses of 
serious incidents that have occurred across the country 
indicate that evacuation is not always the safest response to 
a situation.  Again, based upon assessment and policy the 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 18 of 42 
 
 
SICM will determine the need for safe mode.   
Safe Mode would commence upon a predetermined 
notification procedure.  Those contained or relocated will be 
directed to that identified site (a room number, common 
area, floor, other) and securing the location where you find 
yourself (and those for whom you are responsible) or securing 
the place to which you may be relocated in an emergency.  
This may simply require locking a door.  Again, these are 
critical 
times 
in 
an 
emergency 
and 
student/staff 
accountability measures must be accomplished at this point 
by SICM in accordance with school safety plans.   
3. Establish communications.  Each school will have in place a 
means and procedures for communicating in an emergency 
within their school and to outside public safety agencies.  All 
components of this process are required as part of your 
school submission.  This would also identify those assigned 
telephones or radios and individuals tasked with making 
necessary notifications.  
The individual discovering or receiving initial information 
about an incident is responsible to make a quick assessment 
and take the following steps: 
a. Life threatening situation(s) require immediate 911 
notification.  To notify public safety (police, fire, EMS) call 
911 via any available telephone.  A Fire Alarm pull station 
is to be used in the event of a fire related incident with a 
back-up telephone call to 911 or (617) 343-2880.  
Remember that activating a pull station will summon 
emergency 
assistance 
but 
will 
also 
initiate 
an 
evacuation that may not be appropriate for the 
situation.  


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 19 of 42 
 
 
b. The discoverer will then inform the SICM or an on-site 
Incident Control Team member of the situation. 
c. The SICM or available ICT member will classify the 
incident Tier level and assume management of the 
situation. 
4. Identify the danger zone.  In the assessment phase the best 
means of separating students/staff from any threat must be 
determined.  This may be accomplished by building 
evacuation 
or 
implementing 
containment/lockdown 
procedures.  A perimeter should be established and secured 
to keep students/staff away from the danger zone and in a 
safe area.  Moving people away from the threat, isolating and 
securing the affected area, and restricting access to non-
emergency personnel are techniques to separate the threat 
from students and staff. 
5. Identify and request needed resources.  As early as possible, 
the SICM must try to assess what resources are needed to 
mitigate the crisis and request those resources be made 
available. Support may come from the Central Incident 
Management Team or from outside sources.  The extent of 
required resources will be initially identified during the 
incident tier classification phase.  Supplementary resources 
may be requested by follow-on agencies. 
6. Open command post. The SICM should open a command 
post as soon as possible in the event of an incident.  It should 
be in a spot outside the danger zone from which the SICM 
can effectively manage the incident. The command post 
must have communications capability in order that the SICM 
has access to internal team members as well as public safety 
officials and the Central Incident Management Team.  There 
should be a level of security for the command post to prevent 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 20 of 42 
 
 
unnecessary interruptions by people not involved in the 
response, such as the media, parents, and onlookers.  Safety 
plans and school records must be available at this location.  
Locating primary and secondary command posts ahead of 
time allows you to quickly open a command post whenever 
it is needed.  You can predetermine sites because generally it 
is not important that you have a view of the danger zone.  
Many managers want to manage what they can see, but in a 
major critical incident the SICM must manage the entire 
scene, not just the source of the event.  It is suggested that 
primary and secondary sites be at opposite ends of the 
building.  Just because you have predetermined sites does 
not mean you are locked into using them.  As the SICM, you 
may be dealing directly on location at the source of the issue. 
7. Activate staging areas.  As with the command post, the 
staging areas should be predetermined and located outside 
the danger zone in an area that can be secured.  In the event 
of a major school incident, separate staging areas should be 
available for injured and ill persons, parents, and media 
representatives.  Directing members of these groups will be 
a function of the Incident Control Team building coordinator.  
8. Compile occupancy data.  As stated throughout these 
guidelines, student/staff accountability is essential in an 
emergency.  The following can be used to compile occupancy 
data in an emergency:    
● Daily class/student rosters 
● Daily staff/ employee/visitor sign-in sheets 
● Absentee list (students, staff, employee)  
● Field trip rosters 
● Current emergency information cards 
● Locker assignment list 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 21 of 42 
 
 
● Known restraining orders 
● Photo identification 
● Schedules 
● School bus assignments  
Any roster should be completed, as early as possible each day, 
in a form that can be readily taken from the building during an 
emergency.  Special attention should be given to document 
names of any student/staff member who is transported from 
the school or released to a parent.  Particular attention should 
be paid to ensure the location(s) of any student(s) or staff 
member that is (are) physically or visually impaired is known. 
SECTION II: OVERVIEW 
The above 8 steps are tailored to directly address Tier I situations.  
However, several of the steps are relevant to Tier II and Tier III 
incidents when applied to longer timelines.  Tier II, requiring 
standby and response planning, might utilize steps 3, 4 and 5 
initially, and depending on the situation may entail use of the 
remaining steps. 
Tier III events that occur over longer time periods would still 
require that communication and identification of appropriate 
proactive preventative measures be developed. 
Common sense prevails throughout these guidelines. Those of us 
in the schools understand that it is better to have a plan and no 
crisis than to have a crisis and no plan. 
These basic guidelines are not expected to cover every 
contingency. However, application of these simple steps will 
provide a consistent approach to handling any school incident.  As 
previously stated, the severity and your professional assessment of 
the incident will determine the scope of response.  


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 22 of 42 
 
 
School administrators and staff routinely implement some form of 
crisis response management during the discharge of their duties.  
The intent of the guidelines is to provide a flexible structure that 
will assist you in managing your response. 
The following pages contain an Emergency Response Guide to 
assist your handling of various situations.  It is designed for use as 
a handout for your Site Incident Control Team.  Included in the 
Guide is a section designed specifically for classroom teachers.   
The final section of this booklet is a hardcopy of information that 
you will be asked to compile.  The actual method of collection will 
utilize a Google document developed by the Office of Information 
Services.  The information submitted by your school will be stored 
in a consolidated database that will be reviewed and updated on 
an annual basis. 
SECTION III:  EMERGENCY RESPONSE GUIDE 
1. ASSESSING THE EMERGENCY RESPONSE 
The site incident control manager must identify and 
implement appropriate response. 
 
 
 


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 23 of 42 
 
 
SAFE MODE IF: 
EVACUATION IF: 
The situation presents a threat of 
illness, injury or death to persons 
moving in, around, or about the campus 
and it is determined that Safe Mode 
will provide a greater level of safety for 
those persons.      
● Riot 
● Shooting 
● Hazardous Material Spill 
(Outside) 
● Hostage Situation 
● Suicide 
The situation presents a threat of 
illness, injury or death to persons 
remaining inside a building and it is 
determined that evacuation will provide 
a greater level of safety for those 
persons. 
● Fire 
● Explosion 
● Hazardous Material Spill (Inside) 
● Hostage Situation 
● Bomb Threat 
● Gas Leak 
 
2. SAFE MODE — PERSONNEL ASSIGNMENTS 
All students are to remain contained until emergency 
responders advise otherwise. 
The following is a list of recommended assignments for 
faculty/staff members during a crisis requiring containment.  
* Asterisks denote Site Incident Control Team members. * 
 
* Principal/Assistant Principal (Site Incident Control Manager 
- SICM): Initiate safe mode. Safely monitor situations with 
available resources.  Identify and contact appropriate 
emergency responders and BPS support staff. 


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 24 of 42 
 
 
* Nurse (Risk Analyst): Set up staging area for ill and injured 
persons and administer initial first aid.  Keep ill people 
(overcome with stress and excitement) separate from the 
injured. 
* Registrar 
(Safety 
Coordinator): 
Gather 
occupancy 
information, present occupancy information to Emergency 
Responders. Use an alternative if school does not have a 
registrar. 
* Secretary (Incident Scribe): Continue 911 contact and remain 
on the telephone.  It is imperative that emergency 
responders maintain communication with someone inside 
the school.  Use an alternative if necessary.   
* Custodian (Building Coordinator): Close and lock all 
entry/exit points.  Stand by to assist emergency responders 
with accessibility to mechanical rooms. 
Classroom Teachers: Contain students. Keep classroom 
rosters.  Teachers in possession of cell phones should activate 
their phones.  Teachers should prepare students to follow 
further instructions. 
Assistants: Teachers on administrative duty or P&D periods 
should assist Incident Control Team (ICT) by checking the 
building for unattended students and moving them to 
supervised locations.  Assistants should be posted at 
entry/exit points to ensure that no one leaves the building 
and that only Emergency Responders enter the building. 
Volunteers: Report to office and be available to follow 
instruction. 
Cafeteria Staff: Close and contain cafeteria and kitchen.  Shut 
off appliances and remain in kitchen. 


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 25 of 42 
 
 
3. SAFE MODE PROCEDURES 
Incident Control Team: 
1. Call 911 – Advise reason for safe mode and stay on the line.  Do 
not hang up.  911 dispatchers will route the call to the 
appropriate agencies. 
2. Communicate to all staff that a Safe Mode situation exists and 
begin safe mode process. 
 
3. All school personnel will assume their specific assignments 
listed herein, exercising flexibility where needed to promote 
the safety of all persons. 
4. Staging areas should be set up separately for 1.) injured and 
2.) ill persons. 
5. During safe mode, no one except emergency responders or 
their designees will be permitted to enter, exit, or move about 
the campus. 
6. As additional emergency responders become available, they 
will assume some of the posted assignments to relieve school 
personnel. 
7. Ending the Safe Mode Status: When it has been determined 
by the emergency responders and the principal that 
conditions are safe to resume normal activities, the principal 
shall make an announcement via the P.A. system or send a 
messenger to advise each classroom. 
4. EVACUATION PROCEDURES 
1. Call 911. 
a. Advise reasons for evacuation and stay on the line if safe 
to do so. Do not hang up. 
b. 911 dispatchers will route the call to the appropriate 
agencies.  
2. Start evacuation procedures according to normal fire drill 


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 26 of 42 
 
 
procedures.  Communicate to staff that a TIER I – GREEN 
situation exists and begin the evacuation process.                                    
3. If the threat of an explosion is present, or a hazardous 
material spill has occurred, it may be necessary to move 
the students farther than a normal evacuation distance. 
 
4. Teachers: Bring roll book. It will be necessary to keep a 
roster of all students moved. Each teacher will be 
responsible for his/her class. The ICT safety coordinator will 
organize any dismissal of students. The release of each 
student must be documented. 
5. Staging areas should be setup separately for: 
a. injured 
b. ill persons 
c. parents 
d. media 
 
6. Students and employees with special needs may require 
assistance.  Paraprofessionals assigned to students and 
staff will remain with their assignments throughout the 
duration of the incident. 
7. Ending the Evacuation Status: When it has been 
determined by the emergency responders and the SICM 
that conditions are safe to resume normal activities, the 
SICM shall inform staff that it is safe to reenter the building. 
SECTION IV:  SCHOOL SUBMITTAL SECTION 
This is a mockup of the information you will submit via the BPS 
Intranet.  Please note the Intranet version will have a different 
appearance. 
STEP I:  
Please input the following information. 
▪ School Name: 
▪ Building Name: 
 


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 27 of 42 
 
 
▪ Address: 
 
▪ Principal/Head of School:  
▪ Telephone Number:   
▪ Fax Number:  
 
 
a. Identify primary and secondary command post locations: 
 
Primary Location 
Secondary Location 
Room Name 
 
 
Room Number 
 
 
Phone Number 
 
 
 
b. Identify primary and secondary external assembly areas: 
Primary Location 
Secondary Location 
 
 
 
c. Identify primary and secondary alternate school-site 
locations: 
Primary 
Phone 
Secondary 
Phone  
 
 
 
 
d. Identify your internal communications method(s) that your 
site will use to alert staff to the implementation of a Tier I 
(Evacuation) and a Tier I (Safe Mode) response: 


Page 28:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 28 of 42 
 
 
Tier I – Evacuation 
 
Tier I – Safe Mode 
 
STEP II:   Identify members of your on-site incident control team. 
Title 
Primary 
Alternate 
Responsibility 
Suggested 
Staff 
Site Incident 
Control 
Manager 
(SICM) 
 
Enter Private 
Phone Line,  
Cell Phone #, 
Other Phones 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Determine Tier level 
of event and contact 
resources required to 
address the situation, 
overall management 
of school students 
and staff, and 
ensures that 
superseding agencies 
directives are 
followed 
Principal as 
Primary; 
AP or other 
designee as 
Alternate 
Risk Analyst 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Assess injuries and 
medical risk analysis 
Nurse – Primary; 
Student Support 
Coordinator or 
Language 
Appropriate 
Individual – 
Alternate 


Page 29:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 29 of 42 
 
 
Title 
Primary 
Alternate 
Responsibility 
Suggested 
Staff 
Safety 
Coordinator 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Gather occupancy 
information, support 
efforts to establish 
control 
 
Building Registrar 
or equivalent  
Building 
Coordinator(s) 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Assess building 
security, meet 
responding agencies, 
and direct them to 
appropriate 
location(s) 
School Custodian 
and School Police 
Officer (if 
available) 
Incident 
Scribe 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Log chronology of 
incident 
School Secretary – 
Primary 
Transportation 
Coordinator 
 
STEP III:  
Building Characteristics 
Please indicate if your site includes any of the areas listed below 


Page 30:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 30 of 42 
 
 
in the second column.  The third column should identify the 
location of the respective areas, as well as any other information 
requested in the third column. 
Common Areas 
Description 
Yes/No 
If Yes, List Location 
Auditorium 
 
 
Boiler Room 
 
Also identify if gas or oil is used. 
Cafeteria 
 
 
Computer Lab(s) 
 
 
Fire Escapes 
 
 
Gymnasium 
 
 
Hazardous Materials 
 
 
Health Center 
 
 
Library 
 
 
Loading Dock 
 
 
Nurses Office 
 
 
Out Buildings 
 
 
Playground 
 
 
Ramps 
 
 
Utility room 
 
 
List Others 
 
 
 


Page 31:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 31 of 42 
 
 
 
 


Page 32:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 32 of 42 
 
 
Does your building have the following? 
Description 
Yes/No 
If Yes, List Location 
Attic/Penthouse 
 
Indicate entry points on floor plans 
Basement or crawlspace access 
 
Indicate entry points on floor plans 
Community Center 
 
 
Elevators 
 
 
Fire Safety Systems 
 
 
Grounds Maintenance  
 
Identify chemical storage area(s) 
Kitchen Area 
 
Describe type of kitchen facility:  
satellite, full service, other 
Motion Detectors 
 
 
Pull Stations 
 
 
Security Systems 
 
 
Swimming Pool 
 
 
Vocational Shop Area 
Compressed gasses present? (1) 
Liquid fuels present? (2) 
(1) List 
here 
 
 
(2) List 
here 
 
 
 
If the school has a vocational area, please 
indicate location on floor plans. 
 


Page 33:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 33 of 42 
 
 
STEP IV:  
Occupancy Information 
The purpose of this section is to assist authorities in determining 
if a building evacuation is complete or to provide information 
regarding numbers of persons within the building. 
Description 
Numbers 
Additional Information / Comments 
Total Enrollment 
 
 
Total Staff 
 
 
For students/staff with disabilities (visual, hearing, mobility, 
medical, other) please provide all pertinent information required 
for assistance in an emergency. (Please use the space below.) 
 
PLEASE NOTE: Information in the blocks below should be 
supplied to authorities when emergency events occur.  Please 
develop appropriate measures to ensure that accurate and 
timely headcount information is available. 
Description 
Number 
Visitors 
 
Students off site (field trips, etc.) 
 
Staff off site (training, etc.) 
 
Other (list) 
 


Page 34:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 34 of 42 
 
 
STEP V: 
 
List Communications Equipment 
Please fill in categories as appropriate. 
1. Mobile Communication Devices 
Description 
Yes / 
No 
Quantity 
Assignee 
List Appropriate 
Numbers 
Status: 
O=Operational 
N=Non-operational 
Nextel 
Cell Phone 
2 Way Radio 
 
 
 
 
 
AT & T Ericsson 
Cell Phone 
 
 
 
 
 
Other Cell Phones 
 
 
 
 
 
Beepers/Pagers 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Portable Radios  
Description 
Yes / 
No 
Quantity 
Assignee 
List 
Appropriate 
Numbers 
Status 
O=Operational 
N =Non-operational 
Safety Staff  Two-
Way Radios 
 
 
 
 
 
In-House  
Two Way Radios 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Stationary Communications 


Page 35:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 35 of 42 
 
 
Description 
Yes / 
No 
Quantity 
Assignee 
List 
Appropriate 
Numbers 
Status 
O=Operational 
N =Non-
operational 
Intercom System 
 
 
 
 
 
PA System 
 
 
 
 
House Phones 
 
 
 
 
 
List Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Telephone Information 
Description 
Assignee 
Room 
Number 
Phone # 
Main Phone 
 
 
 
Principal’s Office 
 
 
 
Guidance Office 
 
 
 
Custodian’s Office 
 
 
 
Nurse’s Office 
 
 
 
ETF’s Office 
 
 
 
Student Support 
Coordinator’s Office 
 
 
 
Swimming Pool 
 
 
 
Safety Officer/Para 
 
 
 


Page 36:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 36 of 42 
 
 
Description 
Assignee 
Room 
Number 
Phone # 
Pay Phone(s) 
 
 
 
Phone System - Extension  
 
 
Phone System - Extension  
 
 
E-Mail Address 
 
 
 
Fax Machine(s) 
 
 
 
List All Direct Lines 
 
 
 
 
STEP VI: Floor Plans / Specific Site Information 
The following areas should be indicated on floor plans.  Facilities 
Management personnel will complete this section as noted in 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 School Safety Contingency Plan. 
● Electrical Control Rooms And Panels 
● Utility Access/Controls 
● Classrooms/Labs 
● Interior Maintenance Areas 
● Engineering And Boiler Room Areas 
● Vocational Shop Areas 
● Swimming Pools 
● Grounds Maintenance Storage Areas 
● Kitchens And Food Storage Areas 
● Fire Standpipes And Sprinkler Connections 
● Roof Access, Include Skylights And Indicate Whether Or Not 
Operable 
● Domestic Water Controls 
● Basement Or Crawlspace Access 


Page 37:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 37 of 42 
 
 
● Indicate Which Walls Are Solid Masonry 
● Indicate Which Walls Are Framed Drywall 
 
For building systems, assess and indicate on the floor plans, the 
following: 
● Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems  
● Location and accessibility of air intakes 
● Filtration media location and accessibility 
● Shutdown procedures 
● Plumbing drainage  
● Fire sprinkler systems – emergency chemical 
decontamination use  
● Natural gas – use locations and shutoff(s) 
● Potable water – access to water supply 
● Electrical access/shutoff 
SCHOOL SAFETY / CONTINGENCY PLAN CHECKLIST 
The following is a list of items which should serve as a guide and 
checklist as you review and revise your School Safety / 
Contingency Plan.  These steps are essential to finalize your plan 
as complete, current, and ready in the event of an emergency.  
Please insert this checklist in your School Safety Plan book for 
reference. 
● Command Post Locations:  Are they located too close 
together as opposed to being appropriately separate for 
independent operations? 
● Assembly Areas:  Are they separate and distinct with your 
secondary location at a further distance away from the 
school? 
● Alternate Sites:  Are they realistic with accommodations to 


Page 38:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 38 of 42 
 
 
house all students expected to be relocated?  Have prior 
agreements been made with the Alternate Site host if these 
locations are not BPS properties?  Will transportation be 
required to relocate?  Will dismissal of students in 
accordance with School Department policy be a more 
practical option on the high school level? 
● Internal Communications:  Has consideration been given to 
the use of a system (examples:  public address, intercom, 
bell, messenger, school phones, portable radios), rather than 
the fire alarm for evacuation?  Keep in mind that sounding 
the fire alarm without other instructions will initiate a 
routine evacuation.  This may take building occupants 
through or to an unsafe area.  Safe Mode notification would 
be made via one of the examples given above. 
● Incident Control Team:  Have responsible members of your 
school-based staff been identified for all 
positions/functions?  Have these designated staff members 
been briefed on their duties? 
● Facility Components:  There may be a need for a more 
detailed explanation rather than simply some specifics (e.g., 
liquid fuel – gasoline for snow blowers is kept in an 
approved cabinet in the custodian's office, and security 
system – motion detectors in corridors and stairwells. 
● Disability Information:  Have all persons in your building 
needing assistance during an evacuation been identified?  
Have accommodations been made for safe refuge/ 
evacuation of students/staff requiring assistance in your 
school’s evacuation plan?  
● Communications Equipment and Telephone Information:  
Have all available means of communication between 
identified and portable telephones and radios been 


Page 39:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 39 of 42 
 
 
assigned to staff in accordance with your plan?  Has school 
email address been included?  Have you included Nextel 
direct radio numbers? 
FIRE SAFETY PLAN SECTION 
● Primary Entry for Fire Department:  Is this the location of 
your fire alarm control panel (annunciator)?  Is this your 
street address? 
● Egress:  Are exit doors unlocked from the inside during 
operating hours? 
● Records/Documentation:  Suppression system test 
certification applies to kitchen hood extinguishing system. 
● Evacuation Matrix:  Is there an exit identified for each 
classroom, office, and common area?  Do you have a “hard 
copy” of your evacuation plan included with your school 
plan?  Are prescribed evacuation routes posted for all 
building occupants? 
● Primary/Secondary Refuge:  These are approved locations 
inside the building where mobility impaired occupants 
could safely await evacuation.  Are they identified for each 
floor? 
● Training/Orientation:  Are all members of the school staff 
familiar with details and operation of your school plan?  Has 
the school plan been practiced?  Is the plan updated as 
needed?  Have staff signed off on their training?  Is this 
documentation maintained with your plan? 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The following is a list of publications and agencies that assisted in 
the development of the Boston Public Schools Safety 


Page 40:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 40 of 42 
 
 
Contingency Plans: 
● Emergency Response Guides, San Antonio Independent 
School District 
● Massachusetts Emergency Management Agency (MEMA) 
● Bristol County Sheriff’s Office, “Safe To Learn” 
● Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
● Massachusetts Executive Office of Public Safety, School 
Emergencies; Community Pre-Planning Guide 
● Laboratory at Brown University, Crisis Planning 
Management 
● Massachusetts Office of the Attorney General, Guidelines for 
a Crisis Management Plan 
● U.S. Department of Education 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 


Page 41:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 41 of 42 
 
 
Owner: 
Director of Emergency Management & Preparedness 
Department: 
Office of Emergency Management, Safety Services 
Mailing Address: 
205 Townsend Street Boston, MA 02121 
Phone: 
 (617) 635-6082 or (857) 701-9404 
Email: 
Operations-Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See template below to be used in classrooms to post evacuation routes 
 
(Updated 7.16.2024)


Page 42:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 42 of 42 
 
 
EMERGENCY EVACUATION 
 
ROOM ______  
LEAVE ROOM, GO ______  
USE STAIRWAY ______  
EXIT # ______ 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FSE-04 
Version 01 
 
 
 
BOMB THREAT PROCEDURES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
A bomb threat falsely reporting the existence of an incendiary or 
explosive device (simulated or real) is an offense punishable by 
imprisonment for up to twenty (20) years and/or a fine of not 
more than $10,000. In the event of a bomb threat, a building 
administrator must exercise responsible judgment and authority, 
keeping in mind their responsibility for the safety and well-being 
of the students and staff. To do this, one must (1) get all the facts 
and (2) follow the procedures outlined herein, developed in 
accordance with the policies of the Boston Public Schools and 
the Boston Police Department. 
BOMB THREAT PROCEDURES 
Upon the receipt of a bomb threat, principals/heads of school and 
building administrators are instructed to act in accordance with 
the following procedures: 
Telephoned Bomb Threats: 
1. When taking the call, use the attached Bomb Threat Report 
Form (Attachment A) to record all information. This form 
must be available at the main telephone(s) in the school and 
should be completed immediately after reporting the threat 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-04 
Page 2 of 11 
 
 
 
to the building administrator. A copy of the Bomb Threat 
Report Form is also to be submitted with the incident 
report. 
2. Call the Boston Police Department at 911 and report the 
incident. If the bomb threat is a 2nd or 3rd call, please note 
this in your conversation with the 911 operator. 
3. Call the Department of Safety Services/Boston School Police 
at (617) 635-8000. 
4. Call your operational superintendent.  
5. Alert staff via the school’s internal communication method 
(ref. Superintendent’s Circular FSE-1 School 
Safety/Contingency Plans, Tier I, Containment Procedures) 
to visually survey their room/office for suspicious packages. 
If anything unusual is observed, immediately report this 
information to the building administrator and update 
Boston Police via 911 that something unusual has actually 
been found. 
Designated members of the School’s Safety Team will be 
responsible to survey unsupervised common areas, both 
internal and external. During this survey, all bells/classes will 
be held until the search is completed. 
6. In the event a suspicious package or device is found: 
a. Report the sighting to the building administrator 
immediately. 
b. Do not move, touch, or handle objects. 
c. Do not use two-way radios. 
d. Do not turn off lights or touch switches. 
e. Keep loud noise to a minimum. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-04 
Page 3 of 11 
 
 
 
f. Restrict use of telephone to urgent business only. 
g. Move people from the area. 
h. EVACUATE the school building.  
The Police Department will be fully in charge. This action 
is to be preceded by an announcement which provides 
specific evacuation routes to be followed for the incident 
and manner in which the evacuation signal will be given 
(fire alarm, bell, intercom, and runner). 
7. If no suspicious package or device is found, appropriate safe 
mode procedures are to be followed. However, classes 
should not be changed until the BPD Bomb Squad has 
arrived and evaluated the situation. IF YOU HAVE ANY 
DOUBTS, EVACUATE. 
8. The Police Department will assist the person in charge of 
the building when searching for bombs or other incendiary 
devices. Appropriate school personnel should assist, as 
necessary.  
9. The Police Department will assist and advise the person in 
charge of the building regarding resumption of regular 
school schedule and activities. The operational leader and 
Safety Office must be notified once a decision is made. 
10. Send a complete incident report within 24 hours of the 
incident to the Department of Safety Services. Attach a copy 
of the Bomb Threat Report Form noted above to the 
Incident Reporting Form (attached for your reference). 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-04 
Page 4 of 11 
 
 
 
ELECTRONIC (RECEIVED VIA EMAIL AND WEBSITE): 
The person accessing the threat shall: 
1. 
Save the message on the system. DO NOT DELETE THE 
MESSAGE. 
2. 
Call 911. 
3. 
Notify the Department of Safety Services/Boston School 
Police at (617) 635-8000. 
4. 
Notify your operational superintendent. 
5. 
Print copies of the message to turn over to the police and 
any others who may require them. 
EVACUATION AND RE-ENTRY PROCEDURES 
The principal/head of school or building administrator must 
develop specific evacuation and re-entry plans for their individual 
buildings (c.f. Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 School 
Safety/Contingency Plan). A copy of these plans should be 
included in each school’s Contingency Plans. Such procedural 
plans should include the following: 
1. 
Instruction of office staff regarding proper procedures for 
answering, documenting, and reporting of such 
telephone calls. 
2. 
Method of notifying staff and students of emergency 
conditions. 
3. 
Method of leaving the building (fire drill procedures may 
be followed). Special attention should be given to identify 
assembly points, which are recommended to be located 
300 yards from the building when evacuating for a 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-04 
Page 5 of 11 
 
 
 
suspected bomb. Any area that is being used as a 
staging or assembly area must be searched by a 
designated staff member prior to sending people to that 
area. 
4. 
Specific plans for special needs and physically impaired 
students. 
5. 
Supervision of students by classroom teachers at all times 
while outside the building (prior planning should be done 
with local police authorities in schools that would require 
extra police surveillance and supervision outside that 
school). 
6. 
Controlled re-entry of the building to include supervision 
of students re-entering to insure that no potentially 
dangerous objects are brought into the building. 
These procedures should be utilized in conjunction with your 
School Safety / Contingency Plans. 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-04 
Page 6 of 11 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director 
Department: Safety & Emergency Management 
Mailing 
Address: 
205 Townsend Street Boston, MA 02121 
Phone: 
(617) 635-9122 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
ATTACHMENTS: 
A. Bomb Threat Report Form 
B. Bomb Threat Procedures 
C. Suspicious Package/Device 
D. Warning Notice: Please Post 
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-04 
Page 7 of 11 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENT A 
BOMB THREAT REPORT FORM 
 
Describe caller’s voice: 
 Male  
 Female 
 Angry 
 Excited 
 
 Calm 
 Well spoken 
(educated) 
 Stutter 
 Lisp 
 Rapid 
 
 Slow  
 Raspy 
 
 Deep  
 Soft  
 Loud 
 Incoherent 
 Irrational 
 Foul 
 Crying 
 Disguised  
 Nasal 
 Distinct 
 Slurred 
 
 Accent 
 Taped  
 Familiar 
 Message 
read by caller
If the voice is familiar, who did it sound like? 
Exact wording of threat: 
  
 
Questions to ask: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. When is the bomb going to explode? 
 
2. Where is it right now? 
 
 
3. What does it look like? 
 
4. What kind of bomb is it?  


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-04 
Page 8 of 11 
 
 
 
5. What will cause it to explode? 
6. Did you place the bomb?  
7. Why did you put it in the building?  
8. What is your address? 
 
9. What is your name?  
 
Background sounds: 
 
 
 
 Street 
 Animal 
sounds 
 
 PA system 
 Static 
 
 
 Voices 
 
 Music 
 
 Motor 
 House 
Noises 
 
 Local 
 
 Long distance 
 Office 
machinery 
 Phone booth
 
Time: ____________Date: ___________Length of Call: _________________  
Number at which call was received:  ______________________________  
REMARKS:  _______________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Receiver of Call:  
 __________________________________________________________________  
(Name and Title) 
ATTACHMENT B 
BOMB THREAT PROCEDURES 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-04 
Page 9 of 11 
 
 
 
 
1. STAY CALM. 
2. Obtain information from the caller and record on Bomb 
Threat Form. 
3. Call Boston Police at 911. Provide the police dispatcher with 
all available information. 
4. Activate your school’s Site Incident Control Team. 
5. Call the Superintendent's Office at 617-635-9057. 
6. Administrator will determine if evacuation or containment is 
appropriate. 
7. If evacuating, determine appropriate evacuation routes and 
advise staff in accordance with your School 
Safety/Contingency Plan (internal communication method). 
8. Do not announce Bomb Scare; use a known code to 
communicate the situation to staff. 
9. Take the Bomb Threat Report Form with you if you 
evacuate. 
10. It is recommended that students and staff assembly point(s) 
be at least 300 yards from the building when evacuating for 
a bomb threat. 
11. WHEN IN DOUBT, EVACUATE. 
 
(Ref. Suspicious Package/Device) 
ATTACHMENT C 
SUSPICIOUS PACKAGE/DEVICE 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-04 
Page 10 of 11 
 
 
 
1. STAY CALM. 
2. Call Boston Police at 911. Provide the police dispatcher with 
all available information. 
3. Do not move, touch, or handle the object. 
4. Do not use two-way radios. 
5. Do not turn off lights or touch switches. 
6. Keep loud noise to a minimum. 
7. Restrict use of telephone to only urgent business. 
8. Secure the location. 
9. Activate school’s Site Incident Control Team. 
10. Evacuate after determining the safest routes for all building 
occupants. 
11. Communicate the situation and procedures to be followed 
for evacuation to staff in accordance with your School 
Safety/Contingency Plan (internal communications 
method). 
 
(Ref. Bomb Threat Procedures) 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENT D 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-04 
Page 11 of 11 
 
 
 
PLEASE POST 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
• WARNING • 
It is a crime, as well as disruptive to the 
educational process, to pull a false fire alarm or to 
make a bomb threat. In addition, accidental injury 
or death of a firefighter, student, or staff member 
could result. 
PENALTY FOR FALSE ALARM 
Imprisonment for up to one year or a fine of not 
less than $100 but not more than $500.  
(M.G.L., C. 269, S. 13) 
PENALTY FOR BOMB THREAT 
Imprisonment for up to twenty years and/or a fine 
of up to $10,000. (M.G.L., C. 269, S. 14) 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FSE-05 
Version 01 
 
 
 
MEDICAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The following guidelines relate to a medical emergency of an 
individual student, which is different from episodes where the 
entire School Safety Contingency Plan (please refer to 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 School Safety Contingency 
Plans) is activated. However, the guidelines are complementary. 
The school nurse assigned to each school should assist in the 
development and implementation of medical emergency 
protocols. The elements to be included in the protocol are 
described below. 
EMERGENCY INFORMATION  
Prevention of medical emergencies begins with knowledge of 
underlying medical issues. Therefore, Emergency Information 
Cards (Form 460 or electronic equivalent), containing the basic 
pertinent data to activate an emergency medical plan for the 
student, must be on file at each school. This information should 
be completed upon the opening of school in September and 
updated by January 1 and again by April 1 each school year. 
In addition to parental contact phone numbers, alternate 
emergency contacts, primary language spoken at home and 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-05 
Page 2 of 12 
 
 
 
custody issue documentation, the card or electronic equivalent 
should contain: 
● Insurance company 
● Policy number 
● Clinician name and phone 
● Hospital where the child is taken in an emergency 
● Listing of health problems 
● Listing of medications taken at home as well as in school 
● Allergies 
● Vision or hearing problems 
● History of surgery or serious illness in the last year 
Each building administrator may practice the most expeditious 
means of securing necessary information. 
ROUTINE ILLNESS / MINOR INJURY 
It is the responsibility of the principal/head of school, in 
consultation with the school nurse, to decide whether routinely ill 
or slightly injured students should remain in school or be 
released to their home. When it is necessary for a student to 
leave the school for home, the following procedures must be 
followed. 
● The parent/guardian, or in those cases where they cannot 
be contacted, the individual designated on the Emergency 
Information Card, should make necessary arrangements for 
the student to be picked up at school by a responsible adult. 
(Please refer to Superintendent’s Circular SAF-08 Release of 
Students to Authorized Persons.) 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-05 
Page 3 of 12 
 
 
 
● The parent/guardian should be informed of any emergency 
aid administered at the school and advised to seek further 
medical attention, if necessary. 
● If the parent/guardian of a student who has sustained a 
minor injury or illness cannot be located, the child must 
remain in school until the regular dismissal time. 
● Under no circumstances should a student be released 
without adequate adult supervision. All instances where a 
student is released should be properly documented in a log 
in the office of the principal/head of school. The log must 
indicate all pertinent information, including the time the 
child arrived home. 
● No child is to be released to anyone other than a 
parent/guardian without the parent/guardian’s consent 
and proper identification as the parent/guardian’s 
designee. 
MEDICAL EMERGENCIES 
The principal/head of school has administrative and 
programmatic responsibility for all activities that occur in their 
school. However, in those cases where a medical emergency 
exists, principals/heads of school should consult with and follow 
the advice of the assigned nursing staff.  
● A medical emergency is defined generally as a potentially 
life-limiting or life-threatening situation requiring 
immediate medical attention, as well as cases of indecent 
assault/rape. Protocols for the management of specific 
medical emergencies are available to nurses and are to be 
kept on file in the nurse's office. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-05 
Page 4 of 12 
 
 
 
● In the beginning of each school year, school nurses should 
communicate to relevant staff the known potential health 
emergencies of individual students. This meeting should be 
documented on the student’s Individual Health Plan. 
● The principal/head of school is responsible for responding to 
medical emergencies when a school nurse is not available.  
● Principals/heads of school should compile a list of staff with 
CPR, AED, first aid, and first responder training who can 
provide immediate lifesaving measures until EMS arrives. 
These staff members should be members of the School 
Safety Team. 
● Immediate phone support is also available through the 
Health Services office at 617-635-6788. 
● Each school nurse should complete a list of staff trained in 
the administration of Epinephrine in the event of a life-
threatening allergic reaction. This list must remain on the 
file with the school administrator. Epinephrine should not 
be locked away but should be available to school staff in a 
secure location. 
● It is recommended that the school nurse, school leader, and 
other staff involved in a medical emergency hold a debrief 
meeting following the incident. 
SERIOUS INJURY / ILLNESS PROTOCOL 
● Stabilize the student using the most qualified school staff. 
● Activate the Emergency Medical System (EMS) by calling 911. 
Cases of indecent assault/rape require Boston Police 
notification via 911.* 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-05 
Page 5 of 12 
 
 
 
● Call the Superintendent’s Office at 617-635-9057. 
● Notify School Safety Services at 617-635-8000. 
● The responding ambulance crew of emergency medical 
technicians (EMTs) or paramedics will consult with the 
qualified school officials and assess the need for 
transportation to a medical facility. EMS assumes medical 
management of the child. 
● School personnel designated by the principal/head of school 
must accompany the student in the ambulance and remain 
with the child until a) the parent/guardian arrives or, b) the 
child is attended to by appropriate and qualified medical 
personnel who have taken over the custody of the child, 
whichever occurs first.  
● Accompanying staff are not required to have medical 
experience and are present solely for the comfort of the 
child. It is not recommended that the school nurse 
accompany the student as the school will be without 
nursing support for other students requiring nursing care 
during the school day and other first aid/emergency care.  
● The school’s representative should bring the student’s 
Emergency Information Card, the Individual Collaborative 
Health Plan (if the student has identified chronic health 
needs), emergency action plan (if available), and all other 
pertinent medical information to the hospital. 
● If the emergency occurs on the school bus, the driver 
(and/or monitor, if present) will provide for the safety of the 
child and call the dispatcher, who notifies 911. When EMS 
arrives, the dispatcher will be called with the name of the 
child and the hospital that the child will be transported to. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-05 
Page 6 of 12 
 
 
 
The dispatcher then calls the Department of Safety Services 
at 617-635- 8000, who will notify the family. A safety officer 
will proceed to the emergency room to meet with the 
student and family. 
➢ Release of a student who is a victim of indecent 
assault/rape must comply with procedures outlined in 
both this memorandum and Superintendent’s Circular 
SAF-08 Release of Students to Authorized Persons. 
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES 
Massachusetts General Law and public health regulations govern 
the reporting and control of communicable diseases in public 
schools. All suspected cases of a communicable disease require 
confirmation from local health authorities before a plan of action 
is developed. When a student is suspected of having a reportable 
communicable disease: 
● The principal/head of school or designee will contact the 
school nurse. 
● The nurse or principal/head of school will contact the Health 
Services administration. 
● Health Services will contact and collaborate with the Public 
Health Commission to confirm the diagnosis. 
● The school nurse, in conjunction with principal/head of 
school or designee, Health Services, and local health 
authorities, will assess the health risks and develop a plan of 
action to address the issues. 
Questions or concerns may be directed to Health Services at 617-
635-6788. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-05 
Page 7 of 12 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF SAFETY SERVICES 
The Department of Safety Services/Boston School Police is 
located at 213 Townsend Street (rear of Boston Latin Academy), 
Dorchester, MA 02121, phone 617-635-8000.  
● A school administrator must notify the Dept. of Safety 
Services by telephone of any serious illness or injury after 
notifying Emergency Medical Services via 911.  
● Dept. of Safety Services personnel have received various 
levels of first aid training and may initiate assistance 
appropriate to their level of training. 
● A Dept. of Safety Services administrator will respond to the 
scene if practical.  
● The Dept. of Safety Services may be used as a resource to 
assist in making parent/guardian notification. 
NOTIFICATION TO SCHOOL STAFF AND PARENTS OF SERIOUS 
INCIDENTS 
● The principal/head of school should follow the guidelines 
established in the Superintendent's Circular FSE-01 School 
Safety Contingency Plans, providing feedback to staff.  
● Should an incident become generally known and be a 
matter of concern to parents, the administrator should meet 
with the School Parent Council to advise them of the 
precautionary measures taken to prevent the recurrence of 
such an incident. 
● In the event of a serious illness/injury involving a student, 
the parent/guardian must be notified as soon as possible. 
This notification should include all available information, 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-05 
Page 8 of 12 
 
 
 
including hospital destination if the child is transported to a 
medical facility. 
● If a student is a witness to a medical emergency, their 
parent/guardian should be notified prior to that student 
being removed from the school for interviewing by police or 
any other member of an emergency response agency. 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
September  Complete Emergency Information Cards (Form 460) 
January  
Update Form 460 
April  
Update Form 460 
 
EMERGENCY PLAN 
If an emergency occurs: 
1. Stay with the student. 
2. Call or designate an adult to call the nurse or designee. 
a. State who you are. 
b. State where you are. 
c. State the problem. 
3. An administrator or designee is responsible to institute the 
Emergency Plan. 
Emergency Telephone Procedure: 
1. Dial 911.  


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-05 
Page 9 of 12 
 
 
 
2. State who you are. "I am _______________, a 
teacher/paraprofessional in the Boston Public Schools." 
3. State where you are. "I am at the ________________School, 
address __________________. The telephone number is 
______________________." [NOTE: a number that is not the 
office number should also be provided to EMS.] 
4. State the problem. "There is a _______ year old child here that 
is _____________. We need an ambulance now." 
5. Give specific directions. "_________________ will meet you at 
________________ to direct you." (address) 
6. Don't hang up. Ask for the information to be repeated back 
to you and answer any questions the dispatcher may have. 
Hang up the telephone when all information is correct and 
verified. 
Emergency Procedures: 
1. Notify the principal/head of school or administrator and 
inform them of the nature of the emergency and the 
location of the student. 
2. The administrator or designee will: 
a. Meet and direct the EMTs 
b. Call parent/guardian 
c. Call the Superintendent’s Office at 617-635-9057 
d. Call School Safety at 617-635-8000 
3. The school nurse or designee will accompany the student to 
the hospital. 
4. Paramedics will decide which hospital is appropriate. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-05 
Page 10 of 12 
 
 
 
5. Copy emergency and health care information. 
6. School personnel (not necessarily the nurse) designated by 
the principal/head of school must accompany the student in 
the ambulance and remain with the student until the 
parent/guardian arrives or the child is being taken care of by 
appropriate and qualified medical personnel who have 
taken over the responsibility of the child’s care, whichever 
occurs first. Paramedics will take over care of the student 
when they arrive. 
7. The school representative should bring copies of the 
student's emergency information card, health card, and all 
available information pertinent to the student and the 
incident/illness to the hospital. 
 
 
 
8. The Department of Safety Services may be used as a 
resource to assist in notification to the parent/guardian. 
Telephone 617-635-8000. 
9. School Department personnel must not in any case 
transport a sick or injured child in a privately owned motor 
vehicle. 
10. Under no circumstances should a student be sent to any 
location via taxi based solely on notification received by 
telephone. 
11. It is strongly recommended that the student emergency 
information card (Form 460) be regularly updated. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Djenny Lobo Lopes 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-05 
Page 11 of 12 
 
 
 
Department: 
Health Services 
Mailing Address: 443 Warren Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
OR 
Owner: 
Director of Emergency Management and 
Preparedness 
Department: 
Safety & Emergency Management 
Mailing Address: 205 Townsend Street Boston, MA 02121 
Phone: 
(857) 701-9404 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
OR 
 
Owner: 
Chief of Safety Services 
Department: 
Safety Services 
Mailing Address: 213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000  


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-05 
Page 12 of 12 
 
 
 
E-mail: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FSE-02 
Version 01 
 
FIRE SAFETY PRACTICES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
As we begin another school year, it is essential that we review and 
update 
fire 
prevention, 
life 
safety, 
and 
evacuation 
plans/procedures in all our schools. Accordingly, appropriate 
communications 
and 
cooperation 
with 
Fire 
Department 
authorities is imperative. The Boston Fire Department and The 
Office of Emergency Management and Preparedness  cite specific 
areas of concern and responsibility in this directive, which must be 
brought to your attention. 
The following fire safety practices should be incorporated into 
the fire safety section of your school safety/contingency plan: 
A fire safety checklist (Attachment A) must be completed and 
readily available in the main office along with appropriate 
documents including: fire drill reports, fire alarm tests, * fire 
sprinkler system test, fire extinguisher location document, * fire 
pump test, AED location, a copy of most recent BFD quarterly 
inspection report, and Certificate of Occupancy. 
NOTE (*) if applicable: 
The Boston Fire Department has directed that school officials 
designate a member of their school safety team to report to the 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 2 of 15 
 
main entrance of the school to meet and direct arriving fire 
department and other public safety personnel in an emergency. 
This individual is identified as the building coordinator position in 
your school safety plan and is usually the school custodian. 
The building coordinator should be familiar with this circular, your 
building and fire safety reports, and your fire safety checklist; know 
the location of fire notification and extinguishing systems; and 
have access to all areas. Your plan must also identify an alternate 
person to perform this role in the event your custodian is not 
available.  
FIRE ALARMS 
All fire alarm systems must be maintained in working order at all 
times. It is important to remember that the sounding of any fire 
alarm box automatically transmits a signal to the Fire Alarm Office, 
which simultaneously dispatches fire apparatus to the school. 
Fire Department regulations and Mass. General Law Chapter 268, 
Section 32 prohibits the shutting off or tampering with any fire 
alarm system unless directed to do so by the Fire Department. Any 
deficiency or trouble noted with the fire alarm system must be 
reported immediately to Facilities Management/Fire Alarm 
Division at 617-635-8300.  
Upon the evacuation of a school building because of an alarm, no 
person or persons shall re-enter the building without the 
authorization of the fire officer in charge. The principal/head of 
school, site coordinator or designee must, as a part of their fire drill 
procedures, establish a command procedure for such evacuations.  
Upon the sounding of a fire alarm, approved evacuation 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 3 of 15 
 
procedures for all building occupants are to be followed 
immediately, as well as a verification call made to the Fire 
Department at 911 or 617-343-2880. 
Upon arrival, the Boston Fire Department will exercise its authority 
to order all measures that are deemed necessary for the protection 
of persons and property. This authority includes building 
evacuation and reentry. 
DOOR LABELS, NUMBERS OR LETTERING SHALL NOT BE 
REMOVED OR CHANGED 
The interior and exterior doors that are numbered within Boston 
Public Schools should not be removed or changed by anyone 
except for members of the BPS Facilities Management Team. The 
numbers and letterings are crucial to Boston Police, Boston Fire 
and Boston EMS that will need to respond to your school building 
for an emergency.  
Any changes to the numbering or lettering within your school 
building could disrupt any evacuation or safety plans that already 
exist within the school.  
The existing room numbers are also associated with the school’s 
Asbestos Hazard Emergency Response Act (AHERA) Management 
Plan and the Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) sensors. 
If your school is missing any room numbers or lettering, please 
submit a work order to the Facilities Management Team to ensure 
any issues are resolved before the start of  the school year. 
 
MEANS OF EGRESS 
Designated exits in every school must be maintained as means of 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 4 of 15 
 
egress.  
a. Means of egress must be kept free and clear at all times.  
b. The use of chains, ropes, bars, so-called "dutch locks," or any 
other unauthorized device that would impede egress is 
prohibited during times when school buildings are occupied.  
c. No exit door which is intended to be kept closed shall be 
blocked open, and no device or arrangement shall be used to 
prevent a door designed to be self-closing or automatic-
closing from functioning as intended. Use of wedges to hold 
corridor and stairwell doors open is prohibited. 
d. Interconnecting doors between rooms must be clear and free 
of any locks. Fire and smoke doors are not to be propped 
open with wooden wedges or any other means. This is an 
illegal practice and prohibited in all schools. 
FIRE DRILLS 
All schools shall conform to the following fire drill regulations:  
a. The responsible school administrator in charge of the school 
shall formulate a plan for the protection and evacuation of all 
persons in the event of fire or other emergency and shall 
include alternate means of egress for all persons involved. 
Such a plan is to be developed in consultation with 
appropriate representatives of the Boston Fire Department 
and 
BPS 
Director 
of 
Emergency 
Management 
and 
Preparedness. 
b. The principal/head of school, site coordinator or designee 
shall see that each staff member receives and understands 
proper instructions on the fire drill procedure specified for 
the room or area in which that person carries out their duties 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 5 of 15 
 
before they assume such duties. A log or sign-off list must be 
maintained at the school which documents staff receipt of 
procedures and familiarization with fire safety practices. 
c. A fire drill must be conducted quarterly (September/first 
week of school, December, March, and June) involving all 
students and staff and in accordance with Mass Fire Code, 
527 CMR 1.00: 20.2.4.2. A record of each drill is to be 
documented on the google form available in the BPS Fire & 
Safety Drill Report under Central Office Support with The BPS 
Office of Emergency Management and Preparedness (Safety 
Services). If you have any questions, please contact The BPS 
Office of Emergency Management and Preparedness.  
d. Every student in all schools shall be advised of the fire drill 
procedure and shall take part in a fire drill within three days 
after school begins in September. Fire drill procedures for 
particular rooms shall be posted within those rooms. 
Alternate and obstructed drills shall be exercised; and every 
other quarter, alternate routes shall be used. 
e. As required by Massachusetts Law, 527 CMR 1.05, 20.2.4.2.1.4, 
the head of the Fire Department, or person designated by 
them, shall visit each school four times each year for the 
purpose of quarterly inspections, reviewing Building Fire 
Safety Plans and questioning the administrators. The Fire 
Department may also conduct a fire drill for your building if 
they feel your building is not in compliance with this law. 
Drills may be conducted without advance warning to the 
school personnel other than the person in charge of the 
school at the time. 
f. Fire drill plans must ensure adequate procedures for the 
emergency evacuation of students and staff with disabilities. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 6 of 15 
 
These procedures must also be incorporated in the School 
Safety/Contingency Plan for your school building. Fire drill 
procedures must address student and staff accountability in 
an evacuation. This element of the plan should identify the 
person(s) in charge, ensure accurate class attendance rosters 
are available, and identify specific locations for evacuees to 
assemble. 
g. As required by Massachusetts Law, 527 CMR 1.05, 20.2.4.2.1.6 
Evacuation: Fire exit drills shall include the complete 
evacuation of all persons from the building. 
STORAGE OF FLAMMABLES AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
Flammables shall be stored in an approved locked metal cabinet 
suitably vented. If the amount being stored warrants, a locked 
storage vault should be provided. The storage facility must be 
under the control of a school official, with only the authorized 
personnel allowed access.  
Faculty members should not allow students to fuel individual 
devices or transport any fuel container from one location to 
another.  
All school personnel should be thoroughly instructed as to the 
hazard involved in a particular flammable liquid, chemical, or gas; 
and in its safe and proper handling prior to intended use. Material 
Safety Data sheets should be on file in the main office. No fuel 
container should be allowed to remain in any classroom but 
should be immediately returned to its permanent storage facility.  
The above procedures should be incorporated in the School 
Safety/Contingency Plan for each school building. Materials used 
in school science laboratory experiments are to be stored in 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 7 of 15 
 
compliance with related laws, codes, and ordinances. Quarterly 
school fire inspections are complemented by specialized 
inspections conducted by Boston Fire Department Special 
Occupancies’ Officers. 
*Hazardous storage areas must be secured and identified with the 
appropriate warning label. The appropriate chemical storage 
room 
door 
identification is 
the 
National Fire 
Protection 
Association’s 704 Diamond. 
*Reference Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 Student Safety / 
Health in School Shops, and / or Laboratories and Classrooms; 
and the chemical inventory sheet in Superintendent’s Circular 
FMT-7 Right to Know Law. 
REPORTING OF FIRE INCIDENTS 
The Boston Fire Prevention Code requires the following: 
a. Upon any person's discovery of a fire or smoke in a building 
or premises, they shall immediately notify the Fire Alarm 
Office of the Boston Fire Department of the location of the 
discovery and of the circumstances they have observed. The 
Boston Fire Department must be notified both by sounding 
the nearest fire alarm box (pull station) and by telephone (911 
or 617-343-2880) in the event of a fire. 
b. Any discovery or evidence of a fire or attempt to burn shall be 
reported to the Boston Fire Department by calling either 911 
or 617-343-2880 and the BPS Director of Emergency 
Management and Preparedness (857) 701-9404  to begin an 
arson investigation. BFD considers any fire started by a 
student as a potentially serious mental health issue that, if 
addressed early enough, may prevent more serious problems 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 8 of 15 
 
in the future. 
c. This section shall not be construed to forbid any person who 
discovers a fire, or the owner, lessee, person in charge of the 
building or premises, any occupant, or any of their agents, 
after notifying the Fire Department, from using all means 
necessary to extinguish or control the fire prior to the arrival 
of the Fire Department. 
d. No person shall require, make, issue, post, or maintain any 
order, direction, or regulation, written or verbal, that would 
require or direct anyone to delay reporting a fire to the Fire 
Department. 
e. All personnel must be familiar with fire reporting procedures. 
f. The Boston Fire Department and then Facilities 
Management, The Office of Emergency Management and 
Preparedness are to be notified of all fire-related incidents. 
These include but are not limited to following: 
Fire or explosion 
Good intent calls 
Overpressure rupture 
False alarm/false call 
Medical emergency 
 
 
Hazardous materials (i.e. fuel 
spills or chemical leaks) 
Hazardous conditions 
Service calls 
 
 
 
 
Fire extinguished by occupant
g. Any fire (including paper towels or tissues, even if 
extinguished), must be reported to the Boston Fire 
Department in accordance with procedure delineated in 
sections a. and b. above. 
h. The principal shall submit a written report available with 
this_link: 
https://www.mass.gov/doc/fp-200-school-fire-


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 9 of 15 
 
reporting-form/download of any fire within the school 
building or on the school grounds to BPS Director of 
Emergency Management and Preparedness, (857) 701-9404 
who will then forward it to the Boston Fire Department 
within 24 hours. This is in compliance with Mass General Law, 
Chapter 148, Sec. 2A, which went into effect September 2006.  
This information is also essential for arson prevention action.  
FIRE EXTINGUISHERS/KITCHEN SYSTEMS 
a. Portable fire extinguishers must be serviced annually and 
located in accordance with the building’s Fire Safety Plan. 
b. Kitchen extinguishing systems must be serviced twice a year. 
c. It is the responsibility of senior custodians to ensure 
extinguishers 
are 
visually 
inspected 
weekly 
and 
recharged/inspected annually to ensure they are ready for 
emergency use. 
d. Requests for fire extinguisher servicing should be made to 
Facilities Management at 617-635-9122. 
e. If extinguishers are not hanging in corridors, they must be 
readily accessible. A list of fire extinguisher locations shall be 
posted in the office and maintained in the Fire Safety section 
of your building’s School Safety/Contingency Plan. 
FLAMMABLE DECORATIONS 
a. Flammable decorations, including examples of students' 
work, must not be displayed in paths of egress, including 
doorways and stairwells.  
b. The Boston Fire Department expects us to display reasonable 
amounts of student work. This is to be in accordance with the 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 10 of 15 
 
National Fire Protection Association, Life Safety Code and 527 
CMR 20.2.4.4.3: 
“Paper materials displayed in educational use occupancies 
shall be permitted on walls only in accordance with the 
following: (1) In classrooms, paper materials displayed shall 
not exceed 20% of the total wall area. (2) Paper materials 
displayed shall be attached directly to the walls and shall not 
be permitted to cover an egress door or be placed within five 
feet of an egress door, unless approved by the AHJ. When 
determining wall areas, the door and window openings shall 
be included unless: (a) Paper materials are displayed in fully 
enclosed viewing cabinets with glass or polycarbonate 
viewing panels or covered with glass or polycarbonate sheet 
material in accordance with the Building Code; (b) Flame 
retardant paper material is used for display. (3) Paper 
material displays shall be permitted to cover up to 50% of the 
total wall area in classrooms that are fully sprinklered in 
accordance with Chapter 13.   
Corridor displays and decorations are limited to bulletin 
boards and must not cover more than 10% of the total 
corridor wall space. 
 
c. Certain buildings have more fire protection features than 
others. This may be considered when displaying student 
work. 
d. Please refer to Superintendent’s Circular FSE-03 Building 
Codes and Fire Regulations. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 11 of 15 
 
RIGHT TO KNOW – CHEMICAL INVENTORY 
Each school / facility must maintain an accurate inventory of toxic 
and hazardous substances stored and used in the building. Please 
refer to Superintendent‘s Circular FMT-07 “Right to Know” Law – 
Chemical Inventory. 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
September (First 
Week of School) 
Quarterly Fire Drill Report Due 
December  
Quarterly Fire Drill Report Due 
March  
Quarterly Fire Drill Report Due 
June  
Quarterly Fire Drill Report Due 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Emergency Management & 
Preparedness  
Department: 
Office of Emergency Management, Safety 
Services  
Mailing Address: 
205 Townsend Street Boston, MA 02121 
Phone: 
 (617) 635-6082 or (857) 701-9404 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 12 of 15 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Updated 7.31.2024) 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 13 of 15 
 
ATTACHMENT A 
SCHOOL BUILDING FIRE SAFETY PLANS 
School:                                    
Principal/Head of School:  
 
 
1. Does school have a Fire Safety Plan as part of School Safety/Contingency 
Plan? 
Y 
N 
2. Is the plan readily available in the main office? 
Y 
N 
3. (School Safety/Contingency Plan, Section 6) 
4. Is the plan current for this school year? 
Y 
N 
5. Does plan include following elements: 
a. Description of building (type, height, occupancy) 
Y 
N 
b. Types of fire protection systems (sprinkler system, standpipes) 
Y N 
c. Fire alarms (locations of pull stations, smoke detectors, heat 
detectors) 
Y 
N 
d. Location of exits (primary and alternate) 
Y  
N  
e. Evacuation routes (primary and alternate) 
Y  
N  
f. Stairwell designations 
Y  
N  
g. Smoke control (are corridor doors closed or held open by magnetic 
devices that release when an alarm is activated?) 
Y  
N   
h. Location of extinguishers 
Y  
N  
i. Identity and location of any occupants with disabilities 
Y  
N  
j. Floor plans 
Y  
N  
k. Record of staff training 
Y  
N  
l. Fire drill reports 
Y  
N  
m. Fire alarm system test records 
Y 
N 
n. Copy of building occupancy permit 
Y 
N 
o. Incident Control Team members identified by name and title with 
defined responsibilities in an emergency (including back-ups)Y 
N 
A follow-up phone call must always be made to the Fire Alarm Office 
(911 or 617-343-2880) by a designated staff member. 
p. AED device location: 
Y 
N 
 
 
Date: ________________________________________ 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 14 of 15 
 
ATTACHMENT B 
BOSTON FIRE DEPARTMENT — FIRE PREVENTION DIVISION 
SCHOOL DISPLAY MATERIALS: 527 CMR 1.05 
AREA 
WITH NO SPRINKLERS 
WITH SPRINKLERS 
 
 
 
 
 
Classroom 
20% wall coverage with 
combustible materials allowed. 
 
Nothing within 5ft. of the 
egress door. 
 
No limit if in viewing cabinet, 
covered with polycarbonate, or 
materials are flame retardant* 
50% wall coverage with 
combustible materials allowed. 
 
Nothing within 5ft. of the egress 
door. 
 
No limit if in the viewing 
cabinet, covered with 
polycarbonate, or materials are 
flame retardant.* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exit passageway, 
corridors, and 
assembly area. 
10% wall coverage with 
combustible materials allowed. 
 
Each grouping to be maximum 
of 6 ft. high and 12 ft. wide. 
 
Groups to be separated by at 
least the width of the largest 
adjacent group. 
 
No limit if in the viewing 
cabinet, covered with 
Polycarbonate, or materials are 
flame retardant. 
 
No materials within 5ft. of 
egress door. 
50% wall coverage with 
combustible materials allowed. 
 
Each grouping to be maximum 
of 6 ft. high and 12 ft. wide. 
 
Groups to be separated by at 
least ½ the width of the largest 
adjacent group. 
 
No limit if in the viewing 
cabinet, covered with 
Polycarbonate, or materials are 
flame retardant. 
 
No materials within 5ft. of 
egress door. 
Exits and enclosed 
stairs 
Nothing permitted. 
Nothing permitted. 
 
 
 
 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-02 
Page 15 of 15 
 
NOTES: 
 
(1) 
Door and window openings are to be included when 
calculating wall areas. 
(2) 
Documentation must show compliance with NFPA 701 or 
CA 13115 to be flame retardant. 
(3) 
Plexiglas is not allowed; the covering must be glass or 
polycarbonate. 
(4) 
The posting of exit signage or evacuation plans shall not 
be prohibited by this regulation. 
(5) 
527 CMR 1.05 shall not be applicable to any election 
materials required by law to be posted during any local, 
state, or federal election. 
 
This regulation is effective September 19, 2003. 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
FSE-03 
Version 01 
 
 
 
BUILDING CODES AND FIRE REGULATIONS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
All school buildings are required to comply with Massachusetts 
State Building Codes and Fire Regulations. Adherence to these 
regulations helps to ensure a safe, secure, and accessible learning 
and work environment for students and staff. 
As the person responsible for the school building, the head of 
school/principal/program director shall have responsibility for 
monitoring and maintaining compliance with building codes and 
fire regulations at all times. Staff assigned to the Department of 
Facilities Management and the fire safety director are available 
and should be called upon to assist and support the school 
building administrator in this effort. 
The Inspectional Services Department (ISD) of the City of Boston 
will conduct annual egress inspections, and the Boston Fire 
Department (BFD) will conduct quarterly inspections to assure 
compliance with the state codes and fire regulations. ISD shall 
issue certificates of inspection for occupancy annually to schools 
which comply. Schools in noncompliance will not be allowed to 
open until the deficiencies are corrected and a certificate 
granted. During every school year, ISD building inspections will 
be conducted annually. However, special inspections can be 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-03 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
 
made at any time to assure continued compliance. 
The following guidelines have been mutually agreed upon by the 
ISD and the Boston Public Schools and should assist your efforts 
and those of your staff in maintaining compliance. They must be 
adhered to throughout the year, not just at the time of 
inspection. They are as follows: 
1. All paths of egress must be clear of any furniture and 
materials. 
2. Materials or equipment cannot be stored under/near 
stairwells or in corridors. 
3. Broken furniture must be discarded and not abandoned in 
the corridor. 
4. Teaching and learning is NOT permitted in hallways and 
stairwells. 
5. All doors must be clear of artwork/decorations and 
functional in case of an emergency.  
6. All fire doors must be kept closed at all times, except when 
students are passing between classes or when they have 
been modified as part of a new fire alarm system. 
7. NO CHAINS OR PADLOCKS ON ANY DOORS IN ANY 
BUILDING. 
8. Bars, chains, or other restricted operations of doors are not 
authorized at any time. 
9. Deadbolts or locks may not be used on connecting 
classroom doors. 
10. Classroom connecting doors can not be blocked (essential 
egress). 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-03 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
 
11. Papers and art work hanging from light fixtures must be 
removed. 
12. Using auditorium stages as classrooms is prohibited. 
13. Covering classroom heating systems with combustibles 
(books and papers) is a fire hazard and is NOT permitted. 
14. All electrical and boiler rooms must be locked at all times 
and must not be used for storage. 
15. All fire extinguishers must be charged and have a current 
inspectional tag attached. 
16. All gasoline and flammable liquids must be stored in 
fireproof cabinets. 
17. Corridor displays and decorations are limited to bulletin 
boards and must not cover more than 10% of the total 
corridor wall space and 20% of classroom wall space.  
18. Stairwells and exit doors shall be clear of all flammable 
materials.  
19. Paper materials displayed shall be attached directly to the 
walls and shall not be permitted to cover an egress door or 
be placed within five feet of an egress door, unless approved 
by the AHJ. The ONLY things permitted to be posted on or 
within 5 feet of a door are (1) evacuation routes and (2) the 
classroom’s emergency folder/kit (3) the SafeMode window 
cover the classroom utilizes. 
20.  All rugs, curtains, and furniture must be certified as fire 
retardant and code compliant. 
21. Only electrical appliances authorized by Facilities 
Management are permitted. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-03 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
 
22. Snow blowers and lawn mowers are to be run dry of fuel 
after each use and before being brought into the building. 
23. Classrooms must be kept clean and orderly. 
Your cooperation in maintaining the standards outlined above 
will ensure a quick and successful certification process. 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-03 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Emergency Management & 
Preparedness 
Department: 
Office of Emergency Management, Safety 
Services  
Mailing Address: 
21 Deckard St - Room B28, Boston, MA 02121 
Phone: 
(857) 701-9404 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
OR 
Name: 
Executive Director of Facilities Management  
Department: 
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 
1216 Dorchester Avenue, Dorchester, MA 
02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9135 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
FSE-06  
Version 01  
 
 
 
STUDENT SAFETY / HEALTH IN SCHOOL SHOPS, 
LABORATORIES, AND CLASSROOMS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Each day, thousands of Boston Public School students perform a 
variety of activities within shops and laboratories. To ensure that 
all students and their teachers work in an environment which is 
safe, it is necessary to formulate standard procedures and 
requirements for all schools and their personnel. 
Your performance of these procedures will ensure that you and 
your students are safe. 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF PRINCIPALS/HEADS OF SCHOOL 
1. Inform the staff and students in writing of the safety 
standards and procedures, including the need to wear eye 
protection devices. 
2. Ensure that workable fire extinguishers, blankets, and eye 
wash equipment are readily available (custodians are 
responsible for recharging fire extinguishers). 
3. Make sure that appropriate personnel receive training in use 
of portable fire extinguishers and blankets. 
4. Ensure that staff has instructed all students in safety 
standards and procedures, including School Safety Plan. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 2 of 23 
 
 
 
5. Post building evacuation procedures in classrooms, offices, 
and corridors. 
6. Review and evaluate safety procedures in shops and 
laboratories (refer to Safety Check List attached). 
7. Conduct quarterly fire drills (refer to Superintendent's 
Circular FSE-2 Fire Safety Practices). 
8. Develop emergency procedures in case of a serious accident 
(refer to Superintendent's Circular FSE-05 Medical 
Emergency Management). 
9. Maintain adequate lighting and proper ventilation in shops, 
laboratories, and classrooms. Report problems to Facilities 
Management. 
10. Ensure that food service training programs and/or student-
run restaurants comply with current sanitation code 
regulations. 
11. Be sure that teacher evaluations reflect the implementation 
of safety standards and procedures. 
12. Ensure that a "Right to Know" workplace notice is posted in 
the school's shops/laboratories. 
13. Ensure that all instructors working with toxic or hazardous 
substances receive training as specified in Chapter 111F of 
the Massachusetts General Laws. 
14. State safety regulations within your school-based rules. 
15. Make Material Safety Data Sheets available. 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF TEACHERS 
1. Practice safety procedures; the teacher serves as the 
model for the students). 
2. Set up and maintain shop or laboratory to permit free, 
unobstructed movement of students at benches, around 
equipment and machines, and to allow egress from the 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 3 of 23 
 
 
 
area. 
3. Report all lighting and ventilation problems to the head 
of school/principal. 
4. Develop emergency procedures to follow in case of an 
accident (refer to Superintendent’s Circular FSE-5 Medical 
Emergency Management). 
5. Post safety rules and safety hazards conspicuously in 
appropriate areas; contact the Department of Vocational 
Technical Education for translation of safety rules into 
appropriate language(s). 
 
6. ENFORCE SCHOOL-BASED RULES WHICH ADDRESS 
SAFETY. 
7. Supervise students at all times. Under no circumstances 
shall a teacher leave students unsupervised in a 
laboratory or shop area. If an instructor must leave the 
shop in an emergency, they must: 
a. Arrange for a qualified teacher as replacement OR 
b. Relocate students to a properly supervised area. 
c. Lock laboratory/shop area. 
d. Shut off equipment. 
8. Check fire protection equipment weekly. 
9. Know the location of the closest fire extinguisher. 
10.  Maintain a first aid kit in an easily accessible area. 
11. Check machinery/equipment weekly to make sure safety 
guards are in place and working properly. 
12. Check any gas-burning equipment daily for gas leaks. 
13. If anyone detects the smell of gas, shut off the gas source 
before reporting the problem to your supervisor. 
14. Maintain a dated, self-evaluation safety inspection 
checklist. Safety program checklist forms are available 
from the Department of Career and Technical Education.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 4 of 23 
 
 
 
15. Use the building safety committee as a resource for 
student safety plans. 
16. Present each student with a copy of the shop's safety 
rules and procedures. 
17. Teach safety as an integral part of each job or lesson by: 
a. Testing students on their knowledge of safety rules 
and procedures. 
b. Using objective tests to emphasize shop safety. 
c. Checking student mastery of safe methods and safe 
practices. 
d. Testing students’ handling of tools, operation of 
machines, use of equipment, and trade practices, all 
with a focus on safety. 
e. Having a student sign their written test as indication 
they understand safety rules and procedures. 
f. Filing signed written tests in the student's folder as a 
permanent record. 
18. Know location of AED and qualified operations. 
19. Avoid shop accidents by insisting that students dress 
properly for the laboratory/shop. Each student shall: 
a. Wear shoes with low or flat heels and substantial 
soles, or wear work shoes where mandated. 
b. Wear head covering, pin up hair, or tie hair back. 
c. Wear eye protection devices as per M.G.L. c.71, s.55C. 
d. NOT wear loose-fitting clothes which could get 
caught in moving equipment. 
e. NOT wear rings, bracelets, or necklaces which could 
get caught in moving machinery parts. 
20. Supervise students at all times. Under no circumstances 
should an unsafe piece of equipment be operated. 
Disconnect or remove the fuse to ensure that an 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 5 of 23 
 
 
 
accident will not occur. 
21. Insist that visitors to your area wear safety equipment 
(eye protection, etc.). 
22. Shut off all machines, store all equipment, and shut off 
lights before closing the laboratory/shop for the day. 
23. Make sure that soap and towels are replenished as 
needed. 
24. Establish a foolproof system for dispensing and securing 
tools. 
25. Designate storage for tools to prevent accidents. 
26. Lock up hazardous materials and equipment in 
approved containers when not in use. 
27. Keep machinery and equipment in good condition; 
conduct monthly inspections. 
28. Submit appropriate requisition(s) to paint hazardous 
machinery parts and safety switches in conspicuous 
colors. 
29. Submit appropriate requisition(s) to secure safety mats 
to the floor around machines to prevent slipping. 
30. Check the emergency disconnect switch (PANIC 
BUTTON) to ensure proper operation. 
31. Dispose of oily waste and rags in designated containers. 
32. Ensure that food service training programs and/or 
student-run restaurants comply with current sanitation 
code regulations. 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF NURSES 
1. Help students and teachers obtain necessary health 
screening, where required, for admission to occupational 
programs (e.g., food service/restaurant programs). 
2. Administer first aid. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 6 of 23 
 
 
 
3. Evaluate the injury. 
4. Notify student's parent/guardian. 
5. Complete nurse's section of accident report. 
6. If an accident is serious, in addition to above, implement 
procedures documented in Superintendent's Circular 
FSE-5 Medical Emergency Management. 
ACCIDENT REPORTS 
1. The instructor, nurse, and/or witness will fill out or assist in 
filling out two separate accident reports: Occupational 
Education Accident Report Form EE 111 (attached) and Pupil 
Accident Report Form 201 (attached). 
2. The principal/head of school will retain original Form EE 111 
in the school file and send a copy to the director of Career 
and Technical Education, 75 Malcolm X Blvd., Boston, MA 
02119. 
3. The principal/head of school will retain Form 201 in the 
school file and send a copy to the Department of Safety 
Services, 213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, MA 02121. 
 
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 
The Department of Career and Technical Education will provide 
all schools with technical assistance in improving and 
maintaining safety procedures. Facilities Management and Safety 
personnel are available to coordinate fire prevention activities 
and building inspections. Career and Technical Education staff 
will perform continual safety inspections for 
shops/laboratories/classrooms. 
Contact:   


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 7 of 23 
 
 
 
Director of Career and Technical Education, 617-635-8970 
Director Safety / Emergency Preparedness, 617-635-8300 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Emergency Management and 
Preparedness 
Department: Safety & Emergency Management 
Mailing 
Address: 
205 Townsend Street Boston, MA 02121 
Phone: 
(857) 701-9404 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
ATTACHMENTS: 
Form EEE 111 – Occupational Education Accident Report 
Form 201 – Pupil Accident Report 
Occupational Safety and Health: Safety Inspection Checklist 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 8 of 23 
 
 
 
FORM EE 111 
OCCUPATIONAL EDUCATION ACCIDENT REPORT 
 
Name of injured:  _________________________________________________   
Grade: ________ Age: ________ 
Parent's/guardian's name: ________________________________________  
Address: __________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Date of accident: ______________Time of accident:  _________________  
Location of accident: _____________________________________________  
Description of accident:  __________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
State exact part of person injured and extent of injury:  ___________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Emergency care was given by:  ___________________________________  
Follow-up (check statements which apply): 
☐ Pupil remained in school   
☐ Parent/guardian notified  
☐ Taken to nurse's office by _____________________________________ . 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 9 of 23 
 
 
 
☐ Taken to hospital by  ___________________________________________  
Name of doctor, if any  ___________________________________________  
Witness to accident: ______________________________________________  
Person reporting accident:  _______________________________________  
Signatures:  
Person making this report: _______________________________________  
Person supervising activity/program _____________________________  
School nurse _____________________________________________________  
Principal/head of school  _________________________________________  
 
Report #: ___________________________ (to be filled in by the 
building principal/headmaster) 
 
Reviewed by: _____________________________________________________  
 
Director of Career and Technical Education 
 
NOTE:  Retain original in principal’s/head of school’s office. Send 
copy to the director of Career and Technical Education, 75 
Malcolm X Blvd., Boston, MA 02120. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 10 of 23 
 
 
 
FORM 201 
PUPIL ACCIDENT REPORT 
(Section 225 of the Rules and Regulations) 
All accidents involving injury to pupils on school premises or 
while going to or from school must be reported on Form 201 to 
the Department of School Safety Services, 213 Townsend Street, 
Dorchester, MA 02121 no later than the day following the day of 
the accident. This report is to be filled out in its entirety. A 
duplicate copy of the Pupil Accident Report is to be retained by 
the school principal. If possible, this report should be typewritten. 
1. Student’s Last Name ___________________________________________  
First Name ____________________________Middle Initial ___________  
2. Address  _______________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
3. School  ________________________________________________________   
4. Student’s Age _________Sex ________Grade_____Room___________  
5. Name of Parent or Guardian (in full) ___________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
6. Date of accident _________Time _______ A.M. ______ P.M. ________ 
 
7. Nature and extent of injury ____________________________________  
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 11 of 23 
 
 
 
8. In case of dog bite, has a report been made to the Boston 
Health Department?    ☐ Yes        ☐ No 
8. Specific location of accident ___________________________________  
9. Teacher(s) in charge of location when accident occurred  
 __________________________________________________________________  
9. Teacher(s) in charge present at scene of accident? ☐ Yes   ☐ No 
10. Description of accident, including cause  ______________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
11. In the case of a shop accident, were all guards required by law 
in use?  ________________________________________________________   
 If not, why not?  _______________________________________________  
 ________________________________________________________________  
12. In case of shop or laboratory accident, is the statement 
required by Section 225 of the Rules and Regulations 
attached? ☐ Yes   ☐ No  
If answer is no, state reason: ___________________________________  
13. To whom was the accident first reported? _____________________   
What action was taken by this person?  ________________________  
 ________________________________________________________________  
14. Were first aid supplies available? ☐ Yes   ☐ No 
15. Was any treatment administered? ☐ Yes   ☐ No  


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 12 of 23 
 
 
 
Where?  _______________________________________________________  
16. Did the pupil leave school (or place of accident)? ☐ Yes   ☐ No 
If so, to what destination?  _____________________________________  
17. If transported by ambulance, attendant names, and unit #: 
 __________________________________________________________________  
18. Escorted to destination by whom? (An injured pupil should be 
escorted by a responsible person)  _____________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
19. Names and addresses of witnesses:  ___________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
The accident report has been investigated and will be carefully 
followed up.  
 __________________________________________________________________  
Signature of Safety Counselor 
 __________________________________________________________________  
Signature of Principal 
Date of Report ___________________________________________________  
School  ___________________________________________________________  
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS — VOCATIONAL, ADULT, 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 13 of 23 
 
 
 
AND ALTERNATIVE EDUCATION 
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH:  SAFETY INSPECTION 
CHECKLIST 
School ______________________________________Level _______________  
Department ___________________Area __________Date _____________  
Inspection by __________________________Position _________________  
STUDENTS 
YES  NO  N/A   
1. Are they wearing proper eye protection? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
2. Are they wearing proper footwear? 
 ☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
 
3. Are they properly dressed? 
 ☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
4. Are they trained in safety procedures?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
5. Do they have safe work habits? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐  
 
Comment: 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 14 of 23 
 
 
 
STUDENTS (continued) 
YES  NO  N/A   
6. Are they wearing proper hearing protection? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
7. Are hard hats provided and worn where any 
  
danger of falling objects? 
 
☐ 
☐ 
☐  
Comment: 
8. Do they know how to properly and safely  
use the tools?  
 
☐ 
☐ 
☐  
 
Comment: 
9. Are they trained in safety procedures?  
 ☐ 
☐ 
☐  
Comment: 
10. Do students know what to do in emergencies? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐  
 
Comment: 
WORK AREA 
YES  NO  N/A  
1. Is it clean and orderly? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
2. Are exit lanes clear and marked?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
 
 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 15 of 23 
 
 
 
3.  Are materials neatly stored? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
WORK AREA 
YES  NO  N/A  
1.  Are tools safely stored? 
 ☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
2.  Are floors clean and dry?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
3. Are hazard signs properly posted? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment:  
 
4.  Are floors non-skid? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
5.  Are compressed gas cylinders properly 
 
secured?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
 
DOORS 
YES  NO  N/A  
1.  Are there an adequate number of exits?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
2. Are exits properly marked with signs?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
 
 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 16 of 23 
 
 
 
3.  Is there an unobstructed and clear way to  
 
all doors?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
Are fire doors (automatic/self-closing) in  
 
operable condition? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
 
EYEWASH - EMERGENCY SHOWERS 
 YES  NO  N/A   
1. Are there washing facilities available where  
students are exposed to corrosive materials, 
  
flying chips, or dust?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
ELECTRIC DEVICES  
YES  NO  N/A 
1. Are all outlets and switches in good condition? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
2. Are there any loose wires? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
3. Are all outlets properly grounded? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
 
 
 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 17 of 23 
 
 
 
FIRE DRILLS 
YES  NO  N/A  
1. Are fire drill instructions (exit routes) posted?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
2. Do alarms work properly?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
3. Are fire drill practices held frequently?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
4. Are staff members instructed in the use of  
 
 
extinguishers and fire protection procedures? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
FIRE EXTINGUISHERS 
YES  NO  N/A   
1. Are extinguishers mounted in a readily  
accessible/visible location?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
2. Was the extinguisher inspected during the  
 
past year (check inspection tag)? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
 
 
 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 18 of 23 
 
 
 
FLAMMABLE ITEMS 
YES  NO  N/A   
1. Is there more than one (1) shift or a one (1) day  
 
 
supply of flammable liquid in the school shop 
 
area? 
 ☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
2. Are all flammable liquids (one day's supply  
of oil, previously opened paint, gasoline, etc.) 
sealed in fireproof containers away from 
possible sources of ignition? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
4. Is there an excess of flammables kept on the 
premises? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
4. Are rags and other flammable items stored in a 
 
safe location? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Comment: 
 
5. Are waste receptacles provided and are they  
emptied regularly?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 19 of 23 
 
 
 
FIRST AID 
YES  NO  N/A   
1. Is a fire blanket and container mounted in a  
readily accessible/visible location?  
 ☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
2. Are first aid boxes in an accessible location? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
3. Are the supplies adequate for the type of 
potential injuries in the shop?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
4. Are all items sterile?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
5. Is there a staff member trained in first aid?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
6. Are emergency numbers posted?  
 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 20 of 23 
 
 
 
HEATING 
YES  NO  N/A 
1. Are all heat dispersing units free from  
obstruction and flammable materials?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
2. Is the heat in the shop adequate?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
LIGHTS 
YES  NO  N/A   
1. Is lighting suitable for work being done? 
  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
2. Is there a back-up light in case of emergency  
(battery-operated)? 
 
 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
 
MACHINERY AND TOOLS 
  
 
YES  NO N/A  
1. Are safety guards in place?  
 
 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
2. Are they properly cleaned and lubricated?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
3. Are there any dangerously worn parts?  
 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
4. Is there adequate space between machines for  


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 21 of 23 
 
 
 
working safely?  
 
 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
5. Are there any electrical hazards?  
 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
6. Are hand tools and other equipment regularly  
inspected for safe conditions?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
 
POWER SHUT-OFFS 
 YES  NO  N/A   
1. Are there emergency shut-offs? 
 
 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
2.  Do they work?  
 
 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
 
3.  Are they checked each month?  
 
 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
 
 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 22 of 23 
 
 
 
VENTILATION 
YES  NO  N/A 
1. Do all exhaust ducts terminate outside the  
building? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
 
2. Does tailpipe exhaust exit outside the building?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
3. Does this shop (welding, auto body, etc.) 
require exhaust fans?  
 
 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
4. Does this shop have exhaust fans, and do they 
exhaust to the outside?  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
5. Is the system sufficient with shop at full capacity? ☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
 
RIGHT TO KNOW LAW 
  
 
YES  NO  N/A 
1. Is a workplace notice posted? 
 
 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
2. Are containers labeled that contain toxic or 
hazardous substances? 
 
 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
3. Have the instructors been taught about the   
 


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-06 
Page 23 of 23 
 
 
 
nature and effects of the MSL substances to  
which they may be exposed in the workplace? 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
4. Other: 
 
 
 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Comment: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER:  
AMT-05 
Version 01 
 
 
REVISED MAXIMUM AGE ASSIGNMENT AND 
ENROLLMENT POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
In July 1999, the Boston School Committee adopted a new policy 
of the Boston Public Schools (BPS) covering the maximum age 
for school attendance. In 2019, the School Committee updated 
the maximum age assignment and enrollment policy to include 
the current options available within the network of BPS 
alternative education schools and new opportunities for students 
to continue their education in the district. The revision to the 
original maximum assignment policy clarifies the process and 
streamlines the enrollment and placement of overage students, 
minimizes the risk of students transitioning to adult school 
programming in the middle of a semester when they turn 22 
years old, and expands the range of program options in Boston 
Central Adult High School (BCAHS) to meet the needs of overage 
students in an adult education setting.  
ENROLLMENT OF OVERAGE STUDENTS (19 YEARS OLD OR 
OLDER) 
• Requires the Re-Engagement Center to assess needs and 
make recommendations for the school/program 
assignments of students new to BPS who are age 19 or 
older. 
• For students 19 years old or older who are more than a year 
from graduation (based on the Re-Engagement Center 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-05 
Page 2 of 6 
 
transcript review), enrollment options will be presented for 
BPS alternative education programs designed to support 
overage, under-credited students. 
• For students 19 years old or older who are less than a year 
from graduation (based on the Re-Engagement Center 
transcript review), enrollment options will be presented for 
traditional high school programs and/or BPS alternative 
education programs designed to support overage students, 
based on availability and student needs. 
EXISTING OVERAGE BPS STUDENTS (19 YEARS OLD OR OLDER) 
• Establishes a systematic proactive review process through 
the Re-Engagement Center whereby the district will 
monitor the progress and counsel currently enrolled 
overage students on an annual basis. 
• Establishes that if a student without special needs (without 
an Individualized Education Plan) will turn 21 years old on or 
before August 31st they will be ineligible for enrollment in a 
BPS traditional or alternative education school for the 
upcoming school year, and will be referred to BCAHS (day 
program, evening program, or a satellite adult education 
program authorized by BCAHS) or an external adult 
education program by the Re-Engagement Center. 
• Establishes that students turning 21 years of age on or after 
September 1st are eligible for enrollment for that school 
year. 
• Clarifies that services for eligible students with disabilities 
will continue to be governed by the Individuals with 
Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and Massachusetts General 
Law c. 71B up to and through that student’s 22nd birthday, 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-05 
Page 3 of 6 
 
when deemed appropriate by an IEP team. 
• Provides guidelines for how the district will support 
students who turn 21 years old on September 1st or later 
through the Re-Engagement Center as they transition into 
programs including: BCAHS (day program, evening 
program, or a satellite adult education program authorized 
by BCAHS) if space is available, or an external adult 
education program. 
THE MAXIMUM AGE ASSIGNMENT POLICY 
All students who are seeking a BPS school assignment, including 
new students, re-enrolling students, and students already 
enrolled in the BPS will be provided enrollment options that will 
best meet their needs in providing a path forward to meeting the 
requirements of a BPS high school diploma. The revised 
maximum age assignment and enrollment policy acknowledges 
that some students may benefit from the alternative education 
setting to ensure they can earn the credits required for 
graduation prior to the end of the school year in which they turn 
21 years old. Students transitioning to alternative education 
schools and programs designed to serve the overage population 
will retain any and all rights and privileges accrued change 
“accrued” to “afforded to students…” to students admitted to or 
enrolled in traditional day school programs as required by 
Massachusetts law. 
New BPS students and re-enrolling students who are age 19 and 
older will be directly referred to the Re-Engagement Center by 
registration specialists at the Welcome Center to determine the 
most appropriate placement. As with all enrollment applications, 
if applicable, the Office of Special Education will review each 
student’s Individualized Education Plan (IEP) and any reports 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-05 
Page 4 of 6 
 
presented by the student and/or family to determine how to 
move forward with options for the student.   
Once referred to the Re-Engagement Center, specialists will 
review each overage student’s transcript, enrollment history, 
state assessment results, and Early Warning Indicators to 
determine the most appropriate placement for the student to 
attain a high school diploma prior to turning 21 years old. 
Enrollment options at traditional high school programs and/or 
alternative education programs will be presented based on 
availability and student need. BPS Welcome Services will 
manage the technical aspects of the enrollment and assignment 
process after the Re-Engagement Center assesses student needs 
and makes recommendations for placement. Current alternative 
schools and programs for SY23 that meet the criteria to serve 
overage students include Boston Adult Technical Academy 
(BATA), Accelerated Diploma Program (ADP), LogOn Academy at 
Boston Collaborative High School, and ABCD’s University High 
School. This list of options for overage students will be updated 
annually as needed. 
Currently enrolled BPS students who will reach the age of 19 
before September 1st of the following school year will be 
provided an option to enroll at an alternative education school or 
program designed for overage and/or under-credited students. In 
the revised policy, the responsibility of these recommendations 
will be designated to Re-Engagement Center specialists. The Re-
Engagement Center will notify headmasters of students who are 
eligible for a transfer based on age during the spring semester. 
Re-Engagement Center specialists will recommend the most 
appropriate placement in an alternative education setting or 
continued enrollment at their current school after a review of 
each overage student’s transcript, state assessment results, 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-05 
Page 5 of 6 
 
enrollment history, and assessment of Early Warning Indicators. 
Additionally, if determined that a transfer is in the student’s best 
interest, the Re-Engagement Center will meet with students and 
their parents, provide multiple alternative education options that 
are appropriate for overage students, and work with students 
and parents through the process of the transfer to the alternative 
education program selected prior to the start of the school year. 
BPS Welcome Services will continue to manage the technical 
aspects of enrollment and assignment process based on these 
recommendations. 
The revised maximum age assignment and enrollment policy 
clarifies that if a student will turn 21 years old on or before August 
31st, the school based-administration team will meet with the 
student, and the student will be required to transition to a 
program designed for adults (e.g. Boston Central Adult High 
School, Department of Developmental Services, or other adult 
school program). Students who will turn 21 years old during the 
school year will be allowed to remain enrolled through the end of 
the school year in June and, if necessary, through the end of 
summer session in August. Once referred to the adult school 
program, the process of this transition will be managed by the 
Re-Engagement Center.  
Students who are unable to earn a high school diploma by the 
end of the school year in which they turn 21 years old will be 
referred to BCAHS (day program, evening program, or a satellite 
adult education program authorized by BCAHS) or an external 
adult education program by Re-Engagement Center specialists 
and the headmaster. The referral will be made prior to the start of 
the final spring semester in which a student is 21 years old to 
support an appropriately timed transition. Prior to the student 
exiting their school and transitioning to an adult school option, 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-05 
Page 6 of 6 
 
the headmaster and/or academic counselor will provide an exit 
survey and counseling opportunity to share potential placement 
in the Boston area. Upon exiting a BPS traditional or alternative 
high school, the student will be presented with options to 
continue their education toward a high school diploma or HiSET 
certificate (graduation equivalent) through the exit survey and 
meeting offered by the headmaster and/or academic counselor. 
Services for eligible students with disabilities will continue to be 
governed by the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act 
(IDEA) and Massachusetts General Law c. 71B up to and through 
their 22nd birthday, when deemed appropriate by an IEP team. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of the Re-Engagement Center 
Department: 
Office of Secondary Schools, Re-
Engagement Center 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Roxbury 
MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-2273 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
AMT-04 
Version 01 
 
GRADE LEVEL PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
The Boston Public Schools has established grade level placement 
requirements for Grades K-12, which are detailed herein. 
GRADES K0 - 1 
The Boston Public Schools has established the following age 
requirements for entrance to kindergarten programs and grade 1: 
Grade Level 
Age as of 
September 1 
K0 
3 
K1 
4 
K2 
5 
1 
6 
 
Students who will be 6 years old by September 1, but after June 30, 
may, if they believe appropriate, request a waiver to register for K2 
instead of grade 1. This request must take place prior to registration 
and must be accompanied by an early education provider’s 
recommendation. Requests should be made to the interim executive 
director of Early Childhood at tdias@bostonpublicschools.org, 617-
635-9701. 
There are no other exceptions to this policy. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-04 
Page 2 of 8 
  
GRADES 2 - 8 
The following requirements will be in effect for grades 2-8 at all 
schools, including Early Education Centers and Early Learning 
Centers: 
Grade 
Age as of 
September 1  
2 
7 
3 
8 
4 
9 
5 
10 
6 
11 
7 
12 
8 
13 
 
In cases where a student is registering into Boston Public Schools 
with documented proof of successful completion of the current 
grade, the student must also present documentation to their 
assigned school within 30 days of reporting. If the school 
recommends a change in the student’s grade placement, the school 
leader must submit a “Grade Level Change” request form (below) to 
their school superintendent or operational leader for approval and 
processing by Welcome Services. 
Grade-age assignment in the Boston Public Schools is structured to 
provide a supportive environment in which each student is able to 
grow both academically and socially.  BPS understands students may 
learn differently and need appropriate adjustments to their 
curriculum to ensure they are learning at a pace that fosters success.  
Therefore, teachers are trained to adjust  


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-04 
Page 3 of 8 
  
curriculum and make additional recommendations for students 
within their classrooms.  
GRADES 9 - 12 
Students who are new to BPS will be assigned to a grade based on 
their age.  Students should be aware that schools may shift their 
grade level upon enrollment in their assigned school after a 
transcript review with their school counselor. 
Students with disabilities will be placed in accordance with the grade 
level indicated by their IEP. 
If the student has not recently attended school in the U.S., a U.S. 
territory, or does not have a current transcript, Welcome Services will 
assign students as indicated below: 
Age as of 
September 1* 
General Education, Never LEP, or 
ELD 1-5  
14-16 
Grade 9 
15-17 
Grade 10 
16-18 
Grade 11 
17-18 
Grade 12** 
19-21 
 Referred to Re-Engagement 
Center 
22 
 Students will be recommended 
to Adult Education 
* 
The age range is dependent on minimum age and takes into 
account consideration of students who may have been retained 
or started their academic journey at an older age from their home 
country.  
** Students with sufficient documentation, clearly displaying the 
completion of grade 11, will be placed in grade 12. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-04 
Page 4 of 8 
  
Students who are entering high school are to present prior school 
records to their assigned school within 30 days of reporting. 
For more information regarding the Maximum Age Policy, see the 
Revised Maximum Age Assignment And Enrollment Policy. 
GRADE LEVEL ADVANCEMENT OR REGRESSION 
If a family/emancipated student is contesting their grade level 
placement due to the grade-age assignment process followed while 
in a Welcome Center or the Newcomers Assessment & Counseling 
Center (NACC), the student must be assessed by the school.  If the 
school recommends a change in the student’s grade placement, the 
school leader must submit a “Grade Level Change” request form to 
their school superintendent or operational leader for approval and 
processing by Welcome Services within 30 days of student reporting 
to school. 
If after a period of at least one academic term/semester, a school 
team1 determines that a particular student may benefit from a grade 
level change due to exceptional advancement or regression based 
on other conditions not present during the registration period, a 
school leader may request a grade level change by completing the 
“Grade Level Change” request form and submitting to their school 
superintendent or operational leader for approval and processing by 
Welcome Services.  All changes must be completed by the end of the 
first marking period. 
 
 
1 School-based teams must be composed of content teachers, 
English Learner, and Special Education faculty based on the 
student’s instructional program.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-04 
Page 5 of 8 
  
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Student Assignment and Special 
Admissions 
Department: 
Welcome Services 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 2nd Floor, Boston, MA 
02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9010 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-04 
Page 6 of 8 
  
GRADE LEVEL CHANGE REQUEST FORM - DIRECTIONS 
Find below the description of criteria and evidences that you will 
need to fill out the form on page 8. 
Criteria for Grade Level Change: Documentation and rationale are 
required for all recommendations. 
1. A grade level placement is contested due to a grade-age 
assignment process followed during registration. This form 
must be completed within 30 days of student reporting to 
school. 
2. A school recommends a grade level change for a student due 
to exceptional advancement or regression based on other 
conditions not present during the registration period.  This 
form must be completed by the end of the first marking 
period. 
3. A Grade Level Change Request Form must be approved by a 
school superintendent or operational leader.  After approval, 
Welcome Services will process the request.  
4. Students may not be retained more than once at any level 
(elementary, middle, or high school). 
5. In a grade level change that requires a new school 
assignment, the sending administrator must contact and 
update the receiving administrator. 
6. If an English Learner is being recommended for a grade level 
change, evidence must be provided that this is not due to 
language proficiency, and student/family have been informed 
and are in agreement with the change. 
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-04 
Page 7 of 8 
  
Evidence’s Options 
1. The request meets BPS district guidance in terms of 
attendance, academic achievements, OR interventions 
demonstrated through student work, grades, and 
assessments. A school narrative must be attached. 
2. If the student is in a Special Education program: The student 
has an IEP that specifically and in writing exempts them from 
certain provisions of the promotion policy. IEP attached. 
3. If the student is an English Learner:  There is evidence of a 
transcript review and parent communication that shows an 
agreement with the recommendation.  All documents must 
be filed in the student’s ELD Folder.    
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-04 
Page 8 of 8 
  
GRADE LEVEL CHANGE REQUEST FORM (*) 
 
Name of Student:  ________________________________________________  
School: ___________________________________________________________  
Student ID: __________________Current Program:  __________________  
ELD Level: __________________ SN Code:  ___________________________  
Purpose of Request: 
 Grade Progression:  ______________ to  ______________  
 Grade Regression:  _______________ to  ______________  
When/how was the parent/guardian informed of this request? 
  __________________________________________________________________  
 __________________________________________________________________  
 
OPTIONS (**) 
Evidence meets requested change 
YES 
NO 
Option 1 
 
 
Option 2 
 
 
Option 3 
 
 
 
Signature of sending school leader: 
___________________________________________   Date _________________  
Signature of school superintendent/operational leader: 
___________________________________________   Date:  ________________  
Review/Approval, Welcome Services: Space available?   YES ☐   NO ☐ 
(*) Directions on pages 6 & 7;  (**) Options descriptions are listed on page 7 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
AMT-06 
Version 01 
 
 
 
VOLUNTARY TRANSFER POLICY. 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
This updated policy provides clear guidance regarding the 
allowances and restrictions on school transfers, including an 
explanation of the types of transfers that would be considered 
voluntary or involuntary and the restrictions on the numbers of 
transfers allowed for different grade levels. This policy has 
evolved over time beginning with the 1992 Operating Guidelines 
for Implementing Changes in the Controlled Choice Student 
Assignment Plan and the1999 Interim Report on Streamlining the 
Boston Controlled Choice Student Assignment Plan. This circular 
does not appreciably shift policy or practice, but rather clarifies 
and updates language to reflect the current Home-Based 
Assignment Plan. 
In June 1999, the School Committee amended the policy of the 
Boston Public Schools covering voluntary transfers of students.  
The amendments provide for the following: 
Elementary school students (PK-6) may receive ONE (1) school 
transfer during an academic year. 
Middle school level students (grades 7 & 8) may receive ONE (1) 
school transfer during their middle school careers. 
High school students (9-12) may receive ONE (1) school transfer 
during their high school careers. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular #AMT-6 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Change to school assignments due to change of address, safety, 
programmatic, moving off a waitlist, and disciplinary reasons are 
not considered voluntary transfers with respect to the number of 
transfers allowed.  
Students who permanently move out of their original home base 
are required to attend a school in their new home base; however, 
they may be allowed to continue in their current schools if their 
parent(s) request(s) continuation in the current schools in writing 
with Welcome Services and agrees to arrange and provide 
transportation. Students who move after April 1 will not be 
required to change schools until the following school year. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
 
Owner: 
Director of Student Assignment and Selective 
Admissions 
Department: 
Welcome Services 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 2nd Floor, Roxbury, MA 
02119 
Phone: 
617-635-6058 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
                                                                   Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
AMT-07 
Version 01 
 
 
SAFETY TRANSFER REQUEST PROCEDURES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
From time to time, it becomes necessary to make a change in a 
student’s school assignment. One reason for such an assignment 
change may be motivated by the need to ensure a safe and 
secure learning environment for that student.  For this reason, a 
safety transfer process has been established.   
CRITERIA 
1. All students who are victims or intended victims of a serious 
physical, emotional, and/or electronically transmitted assault 
or who are victims of a violent criminal offense, as determined 
by state law, while in or on school grounds, or out of school 
that impacts school climate, shall be eligible for a safety 
transfer.  All such request forms must have attached BPS 
Incident Reports and/or BPD Reports to document the 
incident. The transfer should be processed by the building 
administrator within ten (10) school days of the receipt of the 
Safety Transfer Request Form.                                    
Students who are perpetrators are subject to the Code of 
Conduct and not eligible for a safety transfer.   
2. Students attending a school designated as “unsafe or 
persistently dangerous” in accordance with Massachusetts 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-07 
Page 2 of 12 
 
 
Department of Education criteria, upon receipt of a parent 
request, shall be transferred to a safe school in compliance 
with the Every Student Succeeds Act (“ESSA”).  The purpose of 
the ESSA is to provide all children a significant opportunity to 
receive a fair, equitable, and high-quality education, and to 
close educational achievement gaps." 
3. Students with an Individualized Education Program (IEP) are 
subject to this transfer procedure provided the building 
administrator has consulted with the OSESS coordinator.  
Resource Room students shall be dealt with in the same 
manner as regular education students.  Students with IEPs 
providing a specialized program and/or requiring a restrictive 
setting shall be reassigned after consultation between the 
coordinator and OSESS assistant program director (APD).  
4. Court orders requiring a transfer of a student shall be honored 
and coded as a safety transfer.  A copy of the court order 
should be forwarded to the operational leader as a part of the 
documentation packet in all cases. 
5. In all cases, student assignments shall be made by Welcome 
Services.  Requests for specific school assignments will not be 
honored, but rather they shall be based on criteria established 
by Welcome Services, as well as on the need to ensure a safe 
learning environment and on the needs of the student. 
PROCEDURES  
The following procedures must be followed in all safety transfer 
cases: 
1. All safety transfer requests must be initiated by the 
parent/guardian/caregiver of the impacted student. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-07 
Page 3 of 12 
 
 
2. The parent/guardian/caregiver should schedule a meeting 
with the head of school/principal/program director of the 
school to which the student is assigned in order to discuss the 
circumstances surrounding the need for a safety transfer. 
3. The parent/guardian/caregiver must complete and sign the 
“Safety Transfer Request Form” (attached).  All requests for 
safety transfers must be referred to the head of 
school/principal/program director for review and 
recommendation. 
4. The head of school/principal/program director shall conduct a 
thorough investigation in response to the 
parent/guardian/caregiver’s request and must gather all 
pertinent information and documentation.  If the student has 
an IEP, the building administrator shall consult with the 
coordinator.  The building administrator will provide a rationale 
for support or rejection of the transfer request on the reverse 
side of the Safety Transfer Form.  The form must be signed by 
the principal/head of school. Please note: this responsibility 
may not be delegated.  If the problem is gang-related, the 
names of the gangs involved should be noted.  If the incident 
has occurred off school grounds, a copy of the Boston Police 
Department report should be obtained; if the incident 
occurred on school grounds, a copy of the Boston Public 
School Incident Report should be attached to the 
documentation packet. 
 
5. If the head of school/principal supports the safety transfer 
request, they must indicate and sign the Safety Transfer Form. 
The completed transfer packet should be sent to the 
operational leader for approval and processing. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-07 
Page 4 of 12 
 
 
The complete safety transfer packet must include: 
a. Completed and signed English version as well as a copy of 
the parent’s safety transfer request form, including the 
building administrator’s rationale for support or rejection 
of request on page 2.  If the language of the home is other 
than English, the parent/guardian/caregiver should 
complete the appropriate language form which should 
be attached to the English version in the packet. 
b. All pertinent supporting documentation (i.e., court orders, 
restraining orders, police reports, reports of investigation 
by school staff or safety services, etc.) If the student has 
been the victim of an assault. 
c. If attending an “unsafe or persistently dangerous school,” 
documentation supporting the school designation as 
such. 
6. If the building administrator does not support the safety 
transfer, a rationale indicating specific reasons for rejecting the 
transfer, including appropriate documentation, must be 
forwarded with the safety transfer packet to the operational 
leader.  
7. The packet must be submitted as soon as possible to the 
operational leader for review of completeness and 
appropriateness. The operational leader is authorized to 
approve or reject the request. 
8. Before forwarding a copy of the approved packet to Welcome 
Services, the operational leader shall consult with the 
Department of Safety Services to discuss potential restrictions 
to school assignments (e.g., gang-related issues, “persistently 
dangerous” schools, etc.). If the student is assigned to a 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-07 
Page 5 of 12 
 
 
substantially separate class, the operational leader shall 
consult with the OSE coordinator and the OSE assistant 
director. 
9. The operational leader will forward the complete safety 
transfer packet of the approved safety transfer request to 
Welcome Services for processing an assignment.  If safety 
issues were raised in discussions with Safety Services (c.f.  item 
8 above), the operational leader shall call these issues to the 
attention of Welcome Services.  Requests which are not 
approved will be returned to the citing the reasons for 
rejection.  If the student requires a substantially separate 
assignment, Welcome Services and appropriate APD shall 
consult.  
10. Welcome Services shall assign the student to the new school 
and notify the receiving and sending schools and the 
appropriate operational leader by email.  The head of 
school/principal/program director of the sending school shall 
notify the parent/guardian/caretaker of the student’s new 
school assignment.  If the safety transfer is not approved, the 
“sending” building administrator shall notify the parent that 
the request has been rejected. 
11. If the transfer is approved, the operational leader shall send a 
copy of the Transfer Form with copies of all attached 
documentation to the new school principal/head of school.  If 
the new building administrator has any further questions, the 
sending school building administrator shall respond to those 
questions. The sending school shall forward a copy of the 
student record to the new school. 
12. Any appeal of a decision at the school level may be made to 
the District Safety Transfer Appeal Committee.  An appeal 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-07 
Page 6 of 12 
 
 
must be made by the parent/guardian/caregiver, in writing, 
within ten (10) days of the receipt of the decision.  An appeal 
can either be submitted in writing and mailed to the attention 
of the Superintendent’s Office, Attn: Ombudsperson, Bruce C. 
Bolling Municipal Building, 2300 Washington Street, Roxbury 
MA 02119 or electronically by submitting the Safety Transfer 
Appeal Form. 
Please Note: 
1. During the summer months, no safety transfers will be 
processed.  Any family seeking a change in school assignment 
due to safety concerns must follow the voluntary transfer 
process by visiting a BPS Welcome Center.  
2. The family has the right to refuse the new school assignment.  
If so, the parent/guardian/caretaker should contact the 
principal/head of school and operational leader that they are 
rescinding the safety transfer request. In this case, the student 
will be returned to their original school and will not be 
permitted to submit an additional safety transfer request 
regarding the incident that initiated the original safety transfer 
request. 
Translations of the required documentation are available here.  
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-07 
Page 7 of 12 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Operations 
Department: 
Operations  
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9057 
E-mail: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 
Safety Transfer Request form on following page. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-07 
Page 8 of 12 
 
 
SAFETY TRANSFER REQUEST 
Principal/Head of School Page 
 
Student’s Name: _______________________________________________________________  
Student ID #: _________________________ 
Grade: ____________ 
Current School:  __________________________________________________  
Special Education Program (if applicable): _______________________  
English Learner Program (if applicable):  _________________________  
Parent/Guardian/Caregiver Conference: 
Date:_____________________________ Time: __________________________  
I     support        reject (check one) this Safety Transfer Request 
for the following reason(s): 
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-07 
Page 9 of 12 
 
 
If approved, please list the names and ID numbers of the other 
students involved that led to this request.   
Name 1  _____________________________  ID _________________________  
Name 2  ______________________________ ID _________________________  
Name 3  ______________________________ ID ______________________  
Name 4  ______________________________ ID ______________________  
If you know of other students that this student should not be 
placed with, please note their names and ID numbers. 
Name 1  _____________________________  ID _________________________  
Name 2  ______________________________ ID _________________________  
Name 3  ______________________________ ID ______________________  
Name 4  ______________________________ ID ______________________  
Please check: 
   I have explained to the parent that, if approved, the student 
can be assigned to any school where there is an available seat, 
and that requests for specific school assignments will not be 
honored.  
 __________________________________________________  _______________  
 
Head of School/Principal  
Date         
Attach documentation.  
cc:  School File 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-07 
Page 10 of 12 
 
 
SAFETY TRANSFER REQUEST 
Family Page 
 
Student’s Name:  _________________________________________________  
I request a Safety Transfer for my son/daughter for the following 
reasons: 
*Please be specific. If there have been incidents at the school, 
describe who was involved, when they occurred, what happened 
and other details (including the names of any gangs involved).  
Attach additional documentation (e.g., copy of incident report, 
copy of Boston Police Report, report of medical provider, etc.) as 
necessary. If there is any school that your child cannot attend 
due to similar safety concerns, then you must list them here. 
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  
 
 
Translated versions of this form can be found here.   


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-07 
Page 11 of 12 
 
 
SAFETY TRANSFER REQUEST COVER PAGE 
Completed by Operational Leader 
  
Operational Leader:  __________________________Date:  ______________  
Student Name:  ________________________________ID: _______________  
The safety transfer has been: 
☐ Approved            
☐ Not Approved 
Please check: 
☐  The school has informed me that they explained to the parent 
that the child will be placed wherever there is an available, 
appropriate seat, and that requests for specific school 
assignments will not be honored. 
Please check one: 
☐  The child can be placed into any school with an available seat. 
☐  The child should not be placed at the following school(s) 
(please explain why): 
School: ___________________________________________________________  
 
 _______________________________________________________________  
School: ___________________________________________________________  
 
 _______________________________________________________________  
 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-07 
Page 12 of 12 
 
 
School: ___________________________________________________________  
 
 _______________________________________________________________  
School: ___________________________________________________________  
 
 _______________________________________________________________  
Additional notes for consideration prior to assignment:  
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  
 
  
 __________________________________________________  _______________  
 
Operational Leader Signature  
Date 


Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
AMT-03 
Version 01 
 
 
ASSIGNMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH SERVICES 
(DYS) COMMITTED STUDENTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
The attached procedures for the assignment of Department of 
Youth Services (DYS) committed students new to the Boston 
Public Schools or re-entering the Boston Public Schools after 
previous discharges have been developed to ensure the efficient 
and appropriate assignment of DYS committed students to the 
Boston Public Schools. 
These procedures are the result of a collaborative effort between 
staff of the Boston Public Schools and the Department of Youth 
Services and should be adhered to in all cases pertaining to DYS 
students. 
I. 
PROCEDURES FOR ASSIGNMENT OF DYS-COMMITTED 
STUDENTS NEW TO THE BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS OR 
RE-ENTERING THE BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS AFTER 
PREVIOUS DISCHARGES 
To initiate and successfully implement the assignment of DYS 
committed students to the Boston Public Schools, the 
procedures listed below shall apply: 
(Please refer to Section II below for additional requirements for 
students recommended for special education.) 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
1. Prior to the student's re-entering BPS, DYS shall write a 
letter on its stationery including the following: 
a. Verification of parent's address 
b. Verification of the student’s address if different from 
the address the student will live at once in a BPS 
program 
c. Purpose of re-enrollment, i.e., to start school or 
request an evaluation by special education 
d. Name, address, and telephone number of DYS 
education liaison and caseworker 
e. Reason, if any, why the student should not be re-
assigned to the previous school. 
2. This letter shall be attached to the application and 
forwarded by a DYS caseworker, educational liaison, or 
representative to the student assignment specialist in the 
appropriate Welcome Center at the time of application for 
a school assignment, along with any other documents 
needed to enroll the student in a Boston Public Schools 
program.  Documents should be provided if a student has 
been in an educational setting that would change the 
previous grade. 
3. A DYS caseworker or educational liaison or representative 
shall assist the student in the entry/re-entry process and 
contact the school administrator in order to prepare 
everyone for a successful return. 
4. The returning student must be accompanied by a DYS 
caseworker or educational liaison or representative when 
returning to a Boston public school. 
 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
Upon application, Welcome Center staff shall: 
1. Provide the parent/guardian/student and DYS 
caseworker/liaison with a student registration form. 
2. Explain and assist the parent/guardian/student and DYS 
caseworker/liaison in the completion of the student 
registration form. 
3. Complete the appropriate information on the student 
registration form. 
4. Provide the parent/guardian/student and DYS 
caseworker/liaison with a Home Language Survey form in 
the language of their preference and assist them in the 
completion of the form. 
Attach to the student registration form: 
a. The completed Home Language Survey form. 
b. The DYS letter cited on page 2, (a) and (b).  If no 
address is stated in the letter, attach the proof of 
residency required by Welcome Services (i.e., social 
service agency ID or letter, preprinted, most recent 
utility bills, bank statement, mortgage with address). 
c. Proof of grade if available (i.e., a transcript 
documenting courses and credits earned while in 
DYS facilities or private placement).  If proof of grade 
is not available, the question of appropriate grade 
level placement shall be addressed in the same way 
it is done with non-DYS committed students. 
d. Copies of immunization records for new enrollees. 
5. Sign and specify the date on the bottom of the student 
registration and Home Language Survey forms.   
6. Provide the DYS caseworker/liaison with a copy of the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
assignment form given to the parent/guardian or student. 
NOTES: 
1. DYS is responsible for notifying the school of assignment 
when a student is committed to DYS.  Please note the 
distinction between DYS detained and DYS committed 
students. Notification for committed students will come in 
the form of a request for records. 
2. The Office of Welcome Services is responsible for 
contacting the appropriate special education assistant 
program director in those cases where the DYS student 
re-entering the BPS has a current/signed IEP to determine 
the status of the student.  
II. 
PROCEDURES TO BE FOLLOWED FOR DYS-COMMITTED 
STUDENTS RECOMMENDED FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION 
PROGRAM 
If a DYS committed student is in a detention center, secure 
facility, or private special education school and is recommended 
for a BPS special education program, a special education 
evaluation shall take place. The private school coordinator or 
supervisor for contracted services is responsible for the 
evaluation procedures as follows: 
1. If the DYS student is in a secure facility or detention center, 
the private school coordinator assigned to DYS is responsible 
for the evaluation. 
2. If the DYS student is in a Chapter 766-approved private 
school, the private school coordinator assigned to that 
private school is responsible for the evaluation. 
3. If the DYS student is out of school but last attended a 
Chapter 766-approved private school with Regional 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
Review Board approval within the previous school year, 
the private school coordinator assigned to the previously 
attended private school is responsible for the evaluation.  
If greater than one school year, or a private program is not 
766-approved, the assigned school’s coordinator is 
responsible for the evaluation. 
4. If the DYS student is out of school and has no current 
school assignment, the private school coordinator is 
responsible for the evaluation.  The DYS caseworker/liaison 
is responsible for submitting all current assessments of 
the student. 
The DYS caseworker/educational liaison or representative shall 
determine the student's assigned school by calling the Office of 
Enrollment Services at 617-635-7750. 
DYS shall refer the student to the special education program 
director or SESS coordinator at the assigned school for an 
evaluation.  For a reevaluation, a request letter will be sufficient 
containing the student's current address, telephone number and 
contact person if other than parent.  Special education program 
directors or SESS coordinators are responsible for providing these 
forms and assisting in their coding, and for the evaluation 
procedures. 
The supervisor of contracted services, special education program 
director, SESS coordinator, or private school coordinator and the 
DYS caseworker/liaison shall work jointly to obtain 
parent/guardian signature on a Consent for Evaluation or 
Reevaluation and Release of Information forms.  The supervisor, 
program director, or coordinator shall complete the evaluation or 
reevaluation within the prescribed timelines and, based on the 
TEAM findings and the recommendation written on the 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
Individualized Education Program (IEP), request placement in a 
special education setting, as follows: 
1. If the TEAM recommends that the student be assigned to 
a full or partial inclusion setting other than a sub-separate 
setting, the supervisor, program director, or coordinator 
and the DYS caseworker/liaison shall work jointly to obtain 
written parental approval of the IEP. 
2. Upon receipt of the signed first page of the IEP, the 
supervisor, program director, or coordinator shall give a 
copy of the signed approved IEP to the DYS. 
3. If the TEAM recommends that the student be assigned to 
a substantially separate setting, the supervisor, program 
director, or coordinator shall submit copies of the required 
assessments and IEP to the assignment coordinator for a 
decision regarding the student's placement in 
collaboration with the level assistant director prior to 
requesting or recommending a specific school 
assignment. 
4. The supervisor, program director, or coordinator shall 
present DYS and the parent/guardian/student over 18 
years of age the recommended placement option. 
5. The supervisor, program director, or coordinator and DYS 
shall work jointly to obtain written approval of the IEP.  
6. Upon receipt of the signed IEP, the supervisor, program 
director, or coordinator shall forward a copy of it to the 
appropriate level assistant director and give a copy to the 
DYS caseworker/liaison, who will then attach such copy to 
the DYS letter referred to in Section I.A. and present both 
documents at the time of application for a school 
assignment, along with any other documents needed. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
7. The level assistant director shall complete the DI5 form 
and forward it to the Enrollment Planning and Support 
Unit to finalize the assignment. 
It is important to note that the TEAM may also determine that 
the student needs no special education services.  In these cases, 
the program director or coordinator will provide a letter 
indicating the TEAM decision of no eligibility and provide it to the 
DYS caseworker. 
III. 
PROCEDURES FOR MAINTAINING COMMUNICATION 
BETWEEN DYS AND BPS AFTER A DYS COMMITTED 
STUDENT IS ASSIGNED TO A BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOL 
Contact Person in School of Assignment 
For students who have entered/re-entered the Boston Public 
Schools from a DYS placement, DYS staff shall contact the head 
of school or principal, who may delegate the ongoing liaison 
function to any of the following school-based staff: 
1. For regular education students, the guidance 
counselor/advisor designated by the head of school or 
principal (for secondary schools) or the principal or 
designee (for elementary schools). 
2. For special education students, the special education 
program director or SESS coordinator.  At the middle 
and high school levels, the program director or SESS 
coordinator shall keep the guidance staff informed of 
all DYS contacts made. 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
NOTE:  In the case of both regular and special education DYS 
students, the school's contact person(s) is responsible for keeping 
the building administrator fully informed relative to the status of 
DYS students assigned to the building. 
Contact Persons at DYS 
For students who have entered/re-entered the Boston Public 
Schools from a DYS placement, school-based staff may contact 
the following DYS personnel. (Because names may change, only 
titles are given; school staff may need to ask for specific names.)  
1. Director of caseworker services, 617-727-7575 
2. Educational liaisons, 617-727-7575 
The following steps should be taken in case of emergency: 
1. The head of school/principal who is having an emergency 
with a DYS student should contact the director of casework 
services, 617-727-7575, who will refer the case to the 
appropriate DYS staff. 
2. In non-emergency situations, the head of school/principal or 
designee should maintain the usual ongoing 
communication with the assigned caseworker or other DYS 
staff.  When in doubt, the director of casework services, 617-
727-7575, may be contacted. 
• If a student committed to a DYS facility enrolls in the Boston 
Public Schools at any time during the school year or in the 
summer, DYS shall advise the respective head of 
school/principal that the student was assigned and provide 
the name of the DYS contact person. 
• If a DYS student who enrolled in a designated BPS school 
transfers to another BPS school during the year, the head of 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
school/principal or designee of the sending school shall 
contact the head of school/ principal of the receiving school 
and inform them about the transfer. 
• By September 1st of each year, DYS shall generate a list of 
DYS students assigned to Boston Public Schools, indicating 
the school to which the student is assigned and the DYS 
contact person for each student.  This list should be updated 
bi-weekly until December and monthly thereafter and sent 
to the Office of Welcome Services for verification.  
• DYS shall designate a liaison to meet periodically with staff 
from the Office of Welcome Services or designee to follow up 
on the status of DYS students who have been assigned to 
BPS schools. 
Principals/heads of school interested in annual in-service sessions 
for their staff with participation of DYS staff should contact the 
director of casework services, 617-727-7575.  
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Student Assignment and Selective 
Admissions 
Department: 
Office of Family and Community 
Advancement 
Mailing Address: Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-7698 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 


Page 1:
 
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
AMT-01 
Version 01 
 
 
EXAM SCHOOL ADMISSIONS: APPLICATION AND 
ADMISSIONS PROCESS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Boston Public Schools has three exam schools: Boston Latin 
Academy, Boston Latin School, and the John D. O'Bryant School 
of Mathematics and Science. All three schools accept new 
students for grades 7 and 9.  John D. O’Bryant School accepts a 
small number of new students in grade 10.  This circular outlines 
operational details regarding the application process, GPA 
calculation, test administration, and invitations. 
 
ELIGIBILITY 
Students currently enrolled in grades 6, 8, or 9 and residing in the 
City of Boston are eligible to apply to one of our exam schools for 
the 2025-2026 school year. The application process to the three 
exam schools includes an admissions test, student GPA, and 
Boston residency.  The GPA will account for 70% and the test score 
will account for 30% of the application.  Students may be eligible 
for additional points if they meet specific criteria. 
Students enrolled in a program for limited or interrupted formal 
education (SLIFE) or enrolled in non-credit bearing courses, and 
students that are not completing grade-level curriculum are not 
eligible to apply for exam school admissions. 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 2 of 14 
 
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS 
Students seeking admission to an exam school must be enrolled 
in grades 6, 8, or 9 and live in the City of Boston to be eligible to 
apply for admission for the 2025-2026 school year.  The residence 
of a minor child is presumed to be the legal, primary residence of 
the parent(s) or guardian(s) who have physical custody of the child. 
 Students actively enrolled in a BPS school have previously 
established residency during their initial registration process, and 
do not need to resubmit documentation. Non-BPS families are 
required to verify their residency in the City of Boston with a BPS 
Welcome Center between October 15, 2024, and November 15, 
2024. Families planning to participate in the Fall 2024 test 
administration, must complete the residency verification process 
and register for the test by November 8, 2024.   
Students who must complete the residency verification process 
include: 
● Students attending a private school 
● Students attending a parochial school 
● Students attending METCO program schools 
● Students attending Commonwealth Charter schools 
(excludes UP Academy, Boston Green Academy, and 
other “in-district” BPS charter schools) 
● Students attending schools outside the City of Boston 
● Students being home-schooled 
The residency verification must be completed even if a family has 
other children enrolled in the Boston Public Schools; the student is 
receiving special education services from BPS; the parent/guardian 
is a current City of Boston employee; or if the student was 
previously enrolled in the BPS. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 3 of 14 
 
As part of the verification process, parents are required to provide 
two approved proofs of residency that list the Boston home 
address, the child’s original birth certificate, the child’s 
immunization record, and the parent’s photo identification. In 
addition, an authorization form for the release of student 
information will be provided during the appointment.  Refer to 
the BPS Registration Document Checklist for details. 
There are two ways to apply: 
1. In-person: Schedule an appointment on this form and visit 
one of the four BPS Welcome Centers to work directly with 
a registration specialist. 
2. By computer: Pre-register here and schedule an 
appointment on this form to complete the application with 
a registration specialist. A follow-up appointment either in- 
person or over the phone is required. Please select ’Pre- 
Register for BPS’ from the side menu. Click the first option if 
you have never registered any child for Boston Public 
Schools. Select the second option if you already have an 
Aspen account. 
A list of required and approved  documents for the registration 
application can be found in the BPS Registration Document 
Checklist. 
 
GRADE POINT AVERAGE 
The Exam Schools policy establishes baseline criteria for eligibility 
beyond residency. Students must have a grade point average of B 
or higher to be eligible to apply.  The GPA will include prior year 
marks in English Language Arts (ELA) and Math and the current 
year marks in ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 4 of 14 
 
School leaders are expected to ensure that all marks and course 
numbers are processed before grade point averages are calculated 
by the Boston Public Schools. All applicants’ course marks must be 
submitted along with school certification that they represent 
performance against the Massachusetts curriculum framework 
grade-level standards by February 7, 2025. Changes in the 
transcription or computation of grade point averages will not be 
accepted thereafter. 
The table below outlines which subject areas and grading terms 
are included for the next admission cycle. 
Applying for: SY25-26 Entrance Year 
7th Grade 
• 5th Grade (SY23-24) 4th Quarter OR 
3rd Trimester OR 2nd Semester marks 
in ELA and Math 
• 6th Grade (SY24-25) 1st and 2nd Quarter OR 1st 
Trimester OR 1st Semester marks in ELA, 
Math, Science, and Social Studies 
9th Grade 
• 7th Grade (SY23-24) 4th Quarter OR 
3rd Trimester OR 2nd Semester marks 
in ELA and Math 
• 8th Grade (SY24-25) 1st and 2nd Quarter OR 1st 
Trimester OR 1st Semester marks in ELA, Math, 
Science, and Social Studies 
10th Grade 
• 8th Grade (SY23-24) 4th Quarter OR 
3rd Trimester OR 2nd Semester marks 
in ELA and Math 
• 9th Grade (SY24-25) 1st and 2nd Quarter OR 1st 
Trimester OR 1st Semester marks in ELA, 
Math, Science, and Social Studies 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 5 of 14 
 
For SY25-26 admissions, both prior year and current year marks will 
be considered to calculate the GPA. Prior year marks will be 
weighted 50%, and current year marks will be weighted 50%. For 
students with previous year international school records, only 
current-year marks will be considered. Students must have marks 
in each subject for the GPA to be calculated.  Applications with 
missing course marks, Incomplete (INC), or Pass (P) marks cannot 
be processed and will be classified as ineligible. 
The July 2021 update to the Exam School Admission Policy 
stipulates that the district “develop and publish a coherent 
district equitable grading policy using an A-F scale wherein an A+ 
is treated like an A.” To address this requirement, the 12-point 
grade scale will be rescaled from 0-12 to 0-11, where 0 points 
represent an F and 11 points represent both A+ and A. This will 
result in the following crosswalk from letter marks to point values 
used in the GPA calculation. 
 
Letter 
Mark 
A+ A 
A- B+ B 
B- C+ C 
C- D+ D 
D- F 
Point 
Value 
11 
11 
10 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 
Students with grade 5 transcripts from Boston Public Schools 
receive marks on multiple standards for each subject area using a 
1-4 grading scale.  The marks in Reading, Writing, and Math will be 
converted to a 12-point scale for the purpose of calculating an 
“overall” mark in the subject area (ELA and Math).  If the “overall” 
mark in either subject is above 11, the number will be rounded 
down to 11 to align with the 1–11 point scale. 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 6 of 14 
 
Standard-Base Marks 4 
3 
2 
1 
Point Value 
12 
9 
6 
3 
* Students participating in advanced courses (honors, AWC, AP, etc.) do not 
receive additional points.  
For more information regarding the conversion of marks and 
calculating composite scores, please review the fact sheet. All non-
BPS schools are responsible for determining their own practices for 
grade conversions.  
TEST ADMINISTRATION 
For SY25-26 admissions, completion of the NWEA MAP Growth 
assessment will be required for admissions. Students will have 
two opportunities to take the assessment, with the first in the 
spring of 2024. For students who would like to improve their 
score, or those who do not take the test in the spring, there will 
be a second opportunity in the fall of 2024. Students are not 
required to take the MAP assessment two times, but in the case 
where there are two complete testing events (twice in Reading, 
twice in Math), BPS will use the highest Math Score and the 
highest Reading score, from either test event, for the invitation 
process.  
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 7 of 14 
 
For 6th and 8th grade students currently attending a BPS school, 
the test will be offered during the school day at their school. No 
registration or action is necessary.  However, for students in grade 
9 at a BPS school; and students in grade 8 already attending a BPS 
exam school, the test will be offered on the weekend. Registration 
is required and is detailed below.  
For students not currently attending a BPS school, the test will 
also be offered on the weekend. Registration for the weekend 
test is required and can be completed online or via a paper form. 
Both will be posted on the exam schools BPS website.  
ADDITIONAL POINTS 
In addition to GPA and test scores, students may be eligible to 
receive additional points towards their application. Students living 
in housing owned by the Boston Housing Authority, are in the 
care of the Department of Children and Families, or are 
experiencing homelessness at any time during the time period in 
which BPS collects grades (March 2024-February 2025) will 
receive an additional fifteen (15) points. 
Students attending a school in the spring of grade 5 (if applying 
for 7th grade at an exam school), grade 7 (if applying for 9th 
grade at an exam school), or grade 8 (if applying for 10th grade at 
the O’Bryant) where 40% or more of the students enrolled come 
from economically disadvantaged families over a 5-year average 
will receive between two (2) and ten (10) additional points, 
depending on the student's socioeconomic tier.  (See below for 
more information about the socioeconomic tiers).  
The district will determine the list of schools eligible for these 
additional points, as defined by the Department of Elementary 
and Secondary Education (DESE). 
 To learn more about how the additional points are calculated, 
you can view the Superintendent’s memorandum.  


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 8 of 14 
 
In the situation where a student has attended more than one 
school in the spring of the 2023-2024 school year, the school that 
submits the student's final marking period course marks will be 
used to determine eligibility for the additional points.  
In the situation where the student is a new resident of the City of 
Boston, the school that submits course marks for the first 
marking period of the 2024-2025 school year will be used to 
determine eligibility for the additional points.  
Additional points are not additive, so students receiving fifteen 
points will not receive any additional points, even if they also 
attend a school where 40% or more of the students enrolled 
come from economically disadvantaged families. 
 
COMPOSITE SCORE CALCULATION 
Admissions to exam schools will use a composite score 
calculation that combines GPA, test scores, and additional points 
(if eligible) into one number. The GPA and test score component 
will be on a 0-100 scale. Students receiving additional points (as 
described below) may receive a maximum score of 110 or 115. 
For SY25-26 admissions and beyond, grades will make up 70% of 
the composite score, and the test score will make up 30% of the 
composite score. The GPA will be divided by 11 (based on the 11-
point scale explained above) and multiplied by 70. Similarly, the 
test score will be scaled to a possible total of 30. The GPA 
component and the test score component will be added together.  
Any additional points that the student receives will be added to 
the total score. For more detail on how BPS calculates students’ 
composite scores, please review the Composite Score Calculation 
Fact Sheet.  


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 9 of 14 
 
TIERS 
Applicants will be placed into one of eight socioeconomic status 
(SES) tiers based on their home address. Families can visit 
bostonpublicschools.org/exam and use the interactive SES Tier 
map to learn what SES tier their child will be considered within. 
The socioeconomic status tiers are based on a socioeconomic 
score for each census tract in the city and are updated each year 
as annual data becomes available, typically in late winter of each 
year. The socioeconomic score is a composite of five measures 
from the American Community Survey and indicates economic 
need relative to the other census tracts in the city. 
• Percentage of persons below poverty 
• Percent of households not occupied by the owner 
• Percent of families headed by a single parent 
• Percent of households where limited English is spoken 
• Educational attainment 
The tiers are proportionally sized based on the number of school- 
aged children in grades 5-8 living in each census tract. Each tier 
will have approximately the same number of seats available.  
Within each tier, students will be ranked from the highest to the 
lowest based on their composite score. If students have the same 
composite score, a random number will be used to determine their 
rank order. The student with the higher random number will be 
ranked higher than the other(s).  
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 10 of 14 
 
 
INVITATIONS 
Invitations will be awarded through ten (10) invitation cycles, with 
10% of seats available to each tier distributed in each cycle. Tier 1, 
which is the tier with the lowest SES score will go first in each 
cycle, and Tier 8, which is the tier with the highest SES score will go 
last in each cycle. 
Students will be invited to their highest-ranked exam school with 
an available seat. If all the seats at a student’s first-choice school 
are already allocated, the student will receive an invitation to 
their second-choice school. If all those seats are already allocated, 
the student will receive an invitation to their third-choice school 
until all seats are filled. 
SCHOOL CHOICE 
 Students must rank at least one exam school to be considered for 
an invitation. However, a student may list up to three exam 
schools and rank those choices by preference. Students will not 
be considered for a school they did not list. For example, if a 
student only ranks Boston Latin School and O’Bryant, they will 
only be considered for invitations to those two schools. If a 
student does not submit choice rankings for any exam schools, 
they will not be considered for any exam school for an invitation.  
BPS grade 6 and 8 students (during the fall of 2024) will receive a 
continuous choice form in January 2025, through email and their 
BPS school, where they will be asked to submit their school 
preferences for the 2025-2026 school year. The continuous choice 
form for BPS students is due by February 7, 2025.  
BPS grade 9 students, and BPS grade 8 students already enrolled 
in an exam school (during the fall of 2024), will be required to visit 
a BPS Welcome Center to submit ranked school choices through 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 11 of 14 
 
a transfer request in January 2025. This group of students will not 
receive a continuous choice form automatically through their BPS 
school. 
Non-BPS students will rank schools during the residency 
verification process, which ends on the third Friday of November 
or November 15, 2024.  
All submitted applications with ranked schools will be processed 
at the same time. 
 
WAITLISTS 
Boston Public Schools will create waitlists for the three exam 
schools for all entry grade levels. 
Students invited to an exam school for SY 2025-2026 will have 
eight days from the first day of school to accept or decline their 
invitation with the BPS Office of Welcome Services. We 
encourage all families to respond to the invitation by the end of 
May to ensure all students are assigned in a timely manner. 
Students who met the minimum eligibility criteria but did not 
receive an invitation to their top-ranked exam school will be 
eligible to be placed on a waitlist for any exam school to which 
they did not get invited. For all three exam schools, admissions 
will only be open for students entering grade 7 and grade 9, as 
well as grade 10 only for the O’Bryant school, and waitlists will 
only be created for those grades. 
Students must have ranked the exam school in order to be 
considered for an invitation and be eligible to be placed on the 
waitlist. Students who receive an exam school invitation to their 
first-choice school will not be eligible to be placed on any waitlist.  
Please note that BPS builds in some expected attrition into the 
number of students invited to each exam school every year by 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 12 of 14 
 
assigning more students than seats. As a result, students may 
not be called from the waitlist until that expected attrition is 
accounted for. 
Waitlists will be capped at 100 students for each school and 
grade. The ordering of the waitlist will function as a continuation 
of the exam school invitation policy. Students will be ordered by 
their composite score and random number within their SES Tier. 
For students with the same composite score, the random 
number will be used as the tiebreaker. 
During the invitation process, students are invited to exam 
schools through 10 invitation cycles, with approximately the 
same number of seats being given out to students from each SES 
Tier in each cycle. Once all the invitations have been distributed 
for a given school and grade, we will continue to follow the same 
process for the purpose of adding students to the waitlist. 
The exam school waitlists will be handled separately from the 
waitlist process for open-enrollment BPS schools. In other words, 
a student can be on an exam school waitlist as well as other BPS 
schools.  Accepting a seat off a waitlist at a different school will 
not affect a student’s place on the exam school waitlist.  
BPS will contact families via phone and email as seats become 
available at the three exam schools. Families will have up to 24 
hours to accept or decline the exam school waitlist.  Please 
ensure your contact information is up to date by visiting a BPS 
Welcome Center. No exceptions to the 24-hour acceptance 
deadline will be made. 
The SY25-26 waitlists will remain in effect until November 30, 
2025. After that date, the waitlists will expire. Waitlists do not roll 
over to future years. 
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 13 of 14 
 
TRANSFERS 
Transfers between the three exam schools are no longer permitted.  
Students are not allowed to change their invitation to a different 
exam school, or transfer between the exam schools after 
matriculation.  If a student is interested in moving to a different 
exam school for grades 9 or 10, they must reapply through the 
formal application process. 
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES: 
October 15 - 
November 8, 2024 
Priority residency verification period for non-
BPS families & registration period for the 
MAP Growth weekend test 
November 11-
November 15, 2024 
Final week of residency verification for non-
BPS families registered for the MAP Growth 
weekend test administration 
December 2-13 
In-school test administration period 
December 7, 2024 
Weekend test administration of MAP 
Growth 
January 2 - 
February 7, 2025 
Marks submitted and certified by sending 
school 
March 2025 
Application status update sent to all 
applicants  
April or May 2025 
Admission decision notifications sent to all 
applicants  
 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 14 of 14 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Student Assignment and 
Selective Admissions 
Department: 
Welcome Services 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9085 
Email: 
exam@bostonpublicschools.org 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


