Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-05 
Version 01 
 
SERVICES FOR MULTILINGUAL LEARNER STUDENTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
The Office of Multilingual and Multicultural Education has 
generated this circular to provide an overview of the operational 
and instructional expectations to effectively service the needs of 
Multilingual Learners (ML), Former English Learners FEL), and 
other subgroups within this student population. All BPS staff are 
expected to be familiar with the information contained in this 
circular and to meaningfully incorporate it into their day-to-day 
work as part of the district’s work to respect the rights of our 
students and families and comply with all related federal and 
state regulatory requirements.  
The following actions are recommended for school leaders and 
their team to review in this circular: 
1. Schedule a dialogue with members of your school’s 
Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) and Language 
Assessment Team (LATF) around the items shared in this 
document to ensure all key stakeholders are aware of their 
responsibilities.  
2. Using the LATF calendar, identify relevant information to be 
reviewed monthly by the school leader and other leaders in 
your school who can support this work.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 2 of 36 
 
3. Work with your LATF to audit your school’s scheduling data 
in Aspen SIS to assure that every EL is appropriately 
scheduled for all English Learner Education (ELE) services 
and special education services for MLs with disabilities.  
Please Note: We will use the term “Multilingual Learner” to 
describe our students who enter BPS with or who are in the 
process of learning one or more languages. However, we will 
continue to use the terms “English Learner” (EL) and “Former 
English Learner” when referring to state and federally defined 
legal rights/services. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. Overview of Policies and Legal Responsibility  
2. ELE Service Compliance Reporting 
3. English Learner Education (ELE) Program Models 
3A. District-Wide ELE Program Requirements 
3B.BPS Formally Designated Program for ELs Descriptions 
3C. Special Notices about ELE Programs in BPS 
4. ESL Services and Teacher Qualifications Compliance 
Information 
4A. ESL Instructional Time: Elementary (K2 to 5/6) and 
Secondary Grades (6-12) 
4B. ESL Instructional Types, Requirements, and 
Recommendations 
4C. ESL Instructional Grouping Requirements 
4D. Educator Licensure and Endorsement Requirements 
5. SY23-24 ESL Service Delivery Determination Guidance 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 3 of 36 
 
1. OVERVIEW OF POLICIES AND LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY 
Under Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 71A, all Boston 
Public Schools with an English Learner student assigned and 
enrolled are obligated to offer an English Learner Education (ELE) 
program. Under Massachusetts Department of Elementary and 
Secondary Education guidance, an ELE program consists of both 
Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) core content and explicit ESL 
instruction appropriate for the student’s English Language 
Development (ELD) level.  Please note that under Section 6 of this 
Chapter, “any school district employee… may be held personally 
liable” for not providing students with access to EL programming.  
The following are additional legal regulations and guidelines that 
pertain to Multilingual Learner Education offered in BPS and ELE 
service requirements for students attending BPS:   
► Resource: The DOJ Successor Settlement Agreement 
► Resource: The META Consent Decree 
► Resource: The LOOK Act 
► Resource: The BPS Systemic Improvement Plan (SIP) 
2. ELE SERVICE COMPLIANCE REPORTING 
The Office of Multilingual and Multicultural Education submits a 
series of reports each year on the compliance of Multilingual 
Learner Education offered in BPS and ELE service requirements 
for students attending BPS in accordance with the DOJ 
Successor Settlement Agreement. Described below is the 
reporting cycle of Paragraph 54, one of the key reports that 
schools are accountable for throughout the school year. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 4 of 36 
 
For each cycle of this report (October, December, and March), 
BPS reviews the following quality indicators for ELE services in 
accordance with Paragraph 54 of The  Successor’s Agreement: 
1. Teacher Qualifications: Are teachers qualified to provide 
services to ML students in their ESL and SEI or bilingual core 
content classes? 
2. ESL Instruction Type: Are ML students assigned to the right 
courses per their program code and receiving daily ESL 
services with the appropriate ESL instructional model/type 
(e.g., push in, pull out, or embedded ESL in grade-level 
English Language Arts (ELS), etc.)? 
3. ESL Minutes: Are ML students receiving the right amount of 
ESL instructional time for their ELD level? 
4. ESL Grouping: Are ML (ELD 1-5) students appropriately 
grouped for ESL? 
 
To support the district’s compliance with the 
above ELE service requirements and ensure 
the accuracy of the reporting data, schools 
are expected to review and update ELE 
service data in Aspen SIS at the beginning of 
each school year, and regularly thereafter in 
preparation for the reporting cycle deadlines 
(October, December, and March), as well as 
as needed upon changes in student enrollment or staffing 
changes. 
► Resource: Consult The Aspen SIS Guide for Recording ESL 
Minutes, Instruction Type, and Teacher (Updated Nov 2023) 
for detailed directions on entering ELE compliance data in 
Aspen. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 5 of 36 
 
► Resource: Consult The DOJ Reporting Schedule with 
Description for a full list of required DOJ reports. 
► Resource: Consult CAO-5 Cheat Sheet for a quick and simple 
outline of ESL compliance. 
► Resource: Consult K-12 Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) 
Scheduling and Service Delivery for detailed ESL scheduling 
suggestions and guidance. COMING SOON 
►  
 
3. ENGLISH LEARNER EDUCATION (ELE) PROGRAM MODELS 
3A.  District-Wide ELE Program Requirements 
Regardless of an EL student being placed in a formally 
designated program for ELs, all BPS schools must comply with 
the following requirements for ELE service: 
1. Castañeda’s Three-Pronged Test for Educationally 
Sound ELE Programs 
2. Providing an equitable curricular and educational 
experience for MLs 
3. Access to a Sheltered English Immersion Program 
Each of these three requirements are described in detail below: 
Castañeda’s Three-Pronged Test for Educationally Sound ELE 
Programs 
All ELE program models implemented in BPS are required by 
DESE to meet “Castañeda’s Three-Pronged Test,” as defined by 
the following components:   
1. The program is based on a sound educational theory or on 
research 
2. The program is implemented with adequate and 
appropriate resources 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 6 of 36 
 
3. The program has resulted in demonstrable academic 
outcomes for ELs. 
► Resource: DESE Guidance on The Integration of Castañeda’s 
Three-Pronged Test into ELE Program Development and 
Review Process 
Providing an Equitable Curricular and Educational Experience 
for MLs 
All ELE programs implemented in BPS are required to provide 
MLs (SDD 1-4) comparable access to the standard curriculum 
within a reasonable period of time and to the range and level of 
extracurricular activities and additional services as non-ML 
students. Additionally, all ELE programs should provide 
opportunities for MLs (SDD 1-4)  to take classes and participate 
in school activities with their English-proficient peers (non-MLs). 
Additionally, all BPS classrooms that serve MLs and non-MLs 
together and provide sheltered content instruction have 
historically been coded as “general education,” but will now be 
coded as State SEI classrooms to be in alignment with State 
regulations and the findings from the 2023 DESE Tiered Focus 
Monitoring report.  And students, regardless of receiving 
foundational level scores1 on the ACCESS or WIDA Screener 
assessments, have equal access to enroll in such classrooms 
where they will be exposed to English-proficient peers. 
 
Access to a Sheltered English Immersion Program 
DESE (2019) SEI guidance offers this helpful framework for the SEI 
ELE program model implemented in Massachusetts:  
 
 
 
1 Foundational level scores are scores of a 1-2.5 on the ACCESS 
test, or scores of a 1-2 on a WIDA Screener. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 7 of 36 
 
SHELTERED ENGLISH IMMERSION (SEI) PROGRAM (2) 
A two-component program model 
 
Sheltered Content Instruction 
(SCI) 
English as a Second Language 
(ESL) 
● Taught by content-area 
licensed and SEI-endorsed 
teacher (or BEE-endorsed in an 
official BPS Dual Language 
program). 
● Access to grade-level content & 
development of discipline-
specific academic language. 
● Occurs throughout the day and 
is designed for optimum EL 
engagement in content. 
 
● Taught by ESL-licensed 
teacher. 
● Additional linguistic support 
ELs need to be delivered 
through systematic, explicit, 
sustained focus on language 
and literacy in the context of 
the Massachusetts Curriculum 
Frameworks. 
● Occurs for a specific amount of 
time each day [in accordance 
with DOJ requirements 
specified in this Circular]. 
 
2Massachusetts law (G.L. c. 71A, §) defines SEI as “an English language 
acquisition process for young children in which nearly all classroom 
instruction is in English but with the curriculum and presentation designed 
for children who are learning the language. Books and instruction materials 
are in English and all reading, writing, and subject matter are taught in 
English. Although teachers may use a minimal amount of the child's native 
language, when necessary, no subject matter shall be taught in any 
language other than English, and children in this program learn to read and 
write solely in English.”  


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 8 of 36 
 
This means that ML (ELD 1-5) students with “General Education,” 
vocational, Inclusion, Substantially Separate, AWC, IB, Montessori, 
and Alternative Education program seat assignments are 
considered to be served in an SEI ELE model — entitled to both 
sheltered core content instruction and ESL.2 
3B. BPS Formally Designated Program for MLs Descriptions 
As stated in section 3A, while schools are required to comply with 
offering all ML students the requirements for ELE programs 
regardless of student placement, BPS also offers ML students 
enrollment opportunities in one of BPS’s formally designated 
programs for MLs. These program models are: 
1. Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program 
a. State SEI - Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program 
with Grade-Level English Proficient Peers 
b. BPS SEI - Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program in 
Language Specific or Multilingual 
c. Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program in 
Substantially Separate Setting 
d. Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program in High 
Intensity Literacy Training (HILT) for SLIFE Multilingual 
2. High Intensity Literacy Training (HILT) for SLIFE Language 
Specific 
3. Dual Language Education (DLE) or Two-Way Immersion 
Program 
4. Newcomer Program 
 
Please Note: Schools are expected to implement the ELE 
program model designated for their school. Any deviation from 
the models outlined in this section must be approved by the 
Office of Multilingual and Multicultural Education (OMME) so as 
not to constitute a violation of the student/parent rights.   
 
The specifics of each program model is described below: 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 9 of 36 
 
Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program3  
As described in section 3A, a Sheltered English Immersion 
Program is a two component program. First, it  incorporates 
strategies to make content area instruction more 
understandable to MLs and to promote English language 
development in core-content classes throughout the day taught 
by SEI (or BEE as appropriate) endorsed teachers. Content area 
instruction integrates sheltering strategies to make content 
comprehensive and develop content area academic language in 
mathematics, English language arts (ELA), social studies, and/or 
science. As the second component to a Sheltered English 
Immersion program, English learner students also receive explicit 
English as a Second Language classes. 
 
Boston Public Schools offers various ways for English learner 
students to access a Sheltered English Immersion program as 
outlined below: 
  
State SEI - Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program with 
Grade-Level English Proficient Peers 
SEI with grade-level English proficient peers offers MLs both 
Sheltered Content Instruction from SEI endorsed teachers 
as well as explicit English as a Second Language classes. 
MLs in this SEI program type are not grouped according to 
their EL status, their first language, or their level of English 
proficiency in any way during core-content classes. They 
 
3 Massachusetts law  (G.L. c. 71A, §2) defines SEI as “an English 
language acquisition process for young children in which nearly 
all classroom instruction is in English but with the curriculum and 
presentation designed for children who are learning the 
language. Books and instruction materials are in English and all 
reading, writing, and subject matter are taught in English. 
Although teachers may use a minimal amount of the child's 
native language when necessary, no subject matter shall be 
taught in any language other than English, and children in this 
program learn to read and write solely in English.”  


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 10 of 36 
 
receive core-content instruction with English proficient 
peers as well as other MLs. Only during English as a Second 
Language classes are MLs in this SEI program type 
separated from their grade-level English proficient peers 
and  grouped according to their ESL Service Delivery 
Determination (SDD).  
 
BPS SEI - Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program in 
Language Specific or Multilingual 
This is a BPS ELE program that incorporates English 
language development throughout the day with strategies 
to make core academic content instruction more 
comprehensible to MLs who are ELD 1-2.5 (scored 1-2.5 on 
WIDA ACCESS Overall score). BPS SEI Language Specific 
programs serve students who all speak the same first 
language; in BPS SEI Multilingual programs, a variety of 
languages are spoken by the students. Instruction is 
conducted in English, with native language clarification for 
students where available. ML Students in an SEI Language 
Specific or SEI Multilingual Classroom in Grades K2-5/6 
receive ESL instruction within their classroom; for sheltered 
content instruction they may be scheduled with English 
Proficient Peers for a portion of their day. Students in SEI 
Language Specific or Multilingual classrooms receive 
instruction in smaller class sizes in comparison to General 
Education classrooms. BPS SEI Language Specific or 
Multilingual programs in at the elementary level, English 
learner students may receive their English as a Second 
Language instruction embedded within the content 
instruction of the class if the homeroom teacher possesses 
their ESL license. For BPS SEI Language Specific or 
Multilingual programs at the secondary level, English 
learner students must receive their English as a Second 
Language instruction in a standalone setting from an 
appropriately licensed teacher. 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 11 of 36 
 
Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program in Substantially 
Separate Setting 
Per the Individualized Education Plan (IEP) and/or 504 plan, 
MLs in this SEI program type will receive core-content 
instruction and ESL services in a self-contained special 
education classroom with specialized instruction 
throughout their day within a small-group structured 
setting. Research-based practices, specific to disability, are 
utilized in the specialized classroom. MLs will continue to 
receive sheltered content instruction where SEI-endorsed, 
content-licensed educators shelter instruction so that they 
can meaningfully engage with grade-level content, and 
develop discipline-specific academic language.Depending 
on the nature of an MLs disability in this program, they may 
have modifications to their ESL services specified in their IEP 
and/or 504 plan.  
 
Sheltered English Immersion (SEI) Program in High Intensity 
Literacy Training (HILT) for SLIFE Multilingual 
In SLIFE multilingual classrooms, the language of 
instruction is English, and teachers provide native language 
support when feasible. All students in this classroom are EL 
students who enter BPS with Limited or Interrupted Formal 
Education (SLIFE); students in the classroom may speak 
different native languages. Students in SLIFE classrooms 
receive instruction from an ESL teacher as well as content 
and literacy from a teacher(s) who is qualified to provide 
sheltered content instruction. Please also see general HILT 
for SLIFE requirements here.  
 
High Intensity Literacy Training (HILT) for SLIFE Language 
Specific 
In language specific HILT for SLIFE programs, MLs receive High 
Intensity Literacy Training (HILT) in their native language. This 
program enrolls EL students who enter BPS with Limited or 
Interrupted Formal Education (SLIFE) who all speak the same 
language. Core academic content is taught in the native 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 12 of 36 
 
language of the student, and is increasingly taught in English as 
the student develops English fluency. Students in SLIFE 
classrooms receive instruction from an ESL teacher as well as 
content and literacy from a Native Literacy/Content teacher(s) 
who is qualified to provide sheltered content instruction. SLIFE 
Native Literacy classrooms have smaller class sizes than State SEI, 
BPS SEI, and Dual Language programs. 
 
General HILT for SLIFE Program Requirements 
BPS recommends this program for MLs ages 8 or older who 
are newcomers to the United States, who have little to no 
literacy in their native language, or whose formal schooling 
was limited or interrupted in their native country. Students 
in HILT for SLIFE programs are grouped across a grade span 
(3-4, 3-5, 5-6, 6-8, 7-8, 9-12) and receive intensive academic 
English language and literacy development, native 
language instruction designed to help them learn reading, 
writing, math, science, and history/social studies, when 
available, and additional classes such as technology, arts, 
and physical education. 
 
In accordance with the META Consent Decree, HILT for 
SLIFE programs must also comply with the following 
requirements: 
 
1) Class size should not exceed 15 students; 
2) During related arts / specials / electives courses, lunch, 
recess, and allotted intervention time, SLIFE students 
must be integrated with other ML students and with 
English-proficient students (Never ELs, Former ELs), 
who serve as peer language models.   
3) “Daily Common Planning Time” must be allocated for 
ESL teachers and Native Language Teachers for age 
and grade-appropriate lesson design and materials 
development. 
4) In language-specific programs such as Spanish, Haitian 
Creole, and Cabo Verdean Creole, students must 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 13 of 36 
 
receive Native Language High-Intensity Literacy 
Training (HILT) as they develop literacy in their native 
language as well as English. 
5) In SLIFE multilingual classrooms, teachers must 
provide native language supports when feasible. 
6) All SLIFE students at the beginning of every year or 
upon assignment to the program must have a HILT for 
SLIFE Individual Learning Plan (ILP) generated that 
qualifies the individual learning targets for the 
academic year. This HILT for SLIFE ILP must be 
completed in full to document progress and determine 
a student's eligibility to exit the program. 
7) No student can be recommended to exit the HILT for 
SLIFE program without meeting the exit criteria as per 
the META Consent Decree. 
 
Dual Language: Two-Way Immersion Programs 
In this program, the classroom is made up of both native 
language and English dominant students. All students learn to 
read, write, speak, and understand both languages either 
through core academic content instruction or explicit language 
instruction, taught by qualified teachers in the two languages. 
The goal of these programs is for students to become bilingual 
and biliterate. BPS seeks to increase more dual-language 
opportunities such as two-way immersion programs, heritage 
language programs, and ethnic studies courses in students’ 
native language. Programs are currently offered in Spanish, 
Haitian Creole, ASL, Vietnamese, and Cape Verdean Creole.  
 
Newcomer Program 
This program is available for secondary MLs at the early stages of 
their English language development. Only MLs who are ELD 1-2.5 
(scored 1-2.5 on WIDA ACCESS Overall score) are eligible for this 
program. Instruction is conducted in English, with native 
language clarification for students where available. English 
learner students in this program receive ESL instruction in a 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 14 of 36 
 
standalone period and sheltered content instruction from core-
content teachers. 
o  
 
3C.  Special Notices about ELE Programs in BPS 
Multilingual Learners with Disabilities 
Multilingual Learners with Disabilities (MLWD) are Multilingual 
Learners who receive disability-related, specialized instruction in 
an inclusion setting, resource room setting, or a substantially 
separate Special Education classroom. Regardless of placement, 
BPS is obligated to provide Multilingual Learners with Disabilities 
(MLWD) with equal access to the same opportunities as other 
students; education, specialized instruction and related services, 
appropriate and effective ESL and content instruction by 
accessing grade-level curriculum while providing 
accommodations, modifications, and goals within the Individual 
Education Plan (IEP). Schools are required to monitor students’ 
progress to ensure appropriate progress toward meeting their 
English language proficiency benchmarks and IEP goals. 
All MLWD (ELD1-5) are entitled to receive both Special Education 
(SPED) and ELE services in a manner appropriate to the student’s 
individual needs by appropriately qualified staff; the District is 
required to provide these services. No ML shall be denied ELE 
services solely due to the nature or severity of the student’s 
disability, and no ML shall be denied SPED services due to their 
ML status. This means, for example: 
● No modifications to ESL service requirements may be 
implemented unless such modifications are determined 
necessary by the student’s IEP or Section 504 team, through 
a documented team process, and in accordance with the 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 15 of 36 
 
narrow exceptions contained in Paragraph 67 of the 
Successor Settlement Agreement.  
● Any approved modification to ESL minutes, grouping, 
and/or instruction must be reflected on the EL Grid, an 
internal monitoring section in EdPlan, and will be reviewed 
by the BPS Office of Special Education/Office of Multilingual 
and Multicultural Education Supervisor(s) of Multilingual 
Learners with Disabilities. 
● ESL may not take the place of a student’s special education 
services. For instance, a student may not be taken out of 
speech therapy or counseling in order to get ESL. 
● Core content instruction and ESL services must be provided 
with all accommodations as outlined in the student’s 504 
plan or IEP. 
Parent Right to Opt Out of the ELE Program 
Parents / guardians have the right to opt out their child from 
some or all components of the district’s ELE program pursuant to 
Paragraphs 33 to 35 of the Successor Agreement. The district 
shall approve a parent’s request to opt out of some or all ELE 
services, only by following the relevant safeguards that are set in 
place: 
1. The decision to opt out must be voluntary and informed, 
and not the product of district practices or influence, the 
result of inadequate or inaccurate information, or 
inadequate district resources. 
2. If any parent/guardian of an EL communicates a refusal to 
have their child enrolled in an EL program, and/or refuses 
all or only specific ELE services (e.g., EL-only SEI classes, 
language-specific SEI classes, or HILT classes) at a 
Welcome Center, NACC, or school, then a meeting will be 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 16 of 36 
 
convened with a representative from OMME, the school 
leader, a representative of the LAT (typically the LAT-F), 
and the parent(s)/guardian(s) to explain the benefits of 
services and address parent concerns AND encourage 
parents to allow their child to receive ELE services for at 
least 30 days before deciding to refuse such services. 
3. If the parent continues to refuse ELE services after an 
explanation of the benefits of the services, the Opt-Out 
form (documenting 1. Evidence of parent meeting and 2. 
Parent request) must be submitted to OMME for review 
and approval and such documentation must 
subsequently by submitted by OMME to the DOJ/OCR. 
4. Students approved as “opt-outs” are still required to 
remain coded as an English Learner, required to 
participate in ACCESS, scheduled with an SEI-endorsed 
teacher(s) for core content, and have their English 
language development monitored by the school. 
5. Parents or legal guardians should revisit their decision to 
opt out every year and submit a new request for the 
current academic year and parents may request to 
restore ELE services at any point. 
Former English Learners 
Upon exit (reclassification to Former EL status), schools must 
regularly monitor students’ academic progress for 4 school years 
upon their reclassification as is required by DESE and federal 
regulations. It is recommended that schools continue to schedule 
Former ELs with an SEI-endorsed content teacher(s) during their 
monitoring period. If during this monitoring period it is 
determined that the student’s EL status be restored (with ELE 
services provided), the LATF must seek written permission from 
the student’s parent/guardian. 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 17 of 36 
 
Please see: 
o Section 5 of this circular for additional information on 
the exit criteria for ELs 
 
4. ESL SERVICES AND TEACHER QUALIFICATIONS COMPLIANCE 
INFORMATION 
Under the terms of the Department of Justice Successor 
Agreement and the policies of the Department of Elementary 
and Secondary Education, all BPS Multilingual Learner Education 
Programs must comply with specific guidelines regarding ESL 
Instructional Minutes, Instructional Type, Instructional Grouping, 
and Educator Licensure and Endorsement. The following section 
outlines the specifics of each compliance measure as applicable 
for each Multilingual / English Learner Education Program 
described section 3.  
Note: Schools are advised to create their schedule for ELE 
services first to ensure that the necessary qualified staff are 
scheduled to meet ML service needs. 
All ML students, including Multilingual Learners with Disabilities 
(MLWD) and Students with Limited or Interrupted Formal 
Education (SLIFE), must be scheduled for the requisite amount of 
daily ESL instruction according to their SDD and must receive 
ESL by an ESL licensed teacher. MLWD with severe disabilities for 
whom compliant ESL instruction as described in the Successor’s 
Agreement is not appropriate may have their services adjusted if 
reflected and recorded appropriately in the IEP through a team 
process. 
 
 
 
 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 18 of 36 
 
4A. ESL Instructional Time: Elementary (K2 to 5/6) and 
Secondary Grades (6-12) 
Elementary (K2 to 5/6) 
Consistent with DESE’s guidance, the table below provides the 
DOJ-approved ESL instructional time per ELD level that the 
district shall provide, to the extent practicable: 
TABLE 2: MINIMUM REQUISITE ESL INSTRUCTIONAL TIME  
FOR MLS IN K2-5/6 
ELD 
Level 
Daily ESL 
Instructional Time 
Weekly ESL Instructional 
Time 
ELD 1 
135 minutes (2 hours, 
15 minutes) 
675 minutes (11 hours, 15 
minutes) 
ELD 2 
90 minutes (1 hour, 30 
minutes) 
450 minutes (7 hours, 30 
minutes) 
ELD 3 
60 minutes (1 hour) 
300 minutes (5 hours) 
ELD 4 
45 minutes 
225 minutes (3 hours, 45 
minutes) 
ELD 5 
45 minutes 
225 minutes (3 hours, 45 
minutes) 
 
Secondary Grades (6-12) 
In order to address the variety of scheduling at our Secondary 
Schools as well as to ensure that students can equitably access 
ESL along with other MassCore / graduation requirements and 
specialty courses (e.g Advanced Placement courses, Dual 
Enrollment, Early College, and any vocational or technical 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 19 of 36 
 
training / courses), OMME has shifted from a “minutes” 
framework at the Secondary level to a “blocks required” 
framework. 
TABLE 3: SECONDARY SCHOOL ESL SCHEDULING* 
School’s Daily 
Course Block 
Length 
(Minutes) 
# of Daily ESL Blocks Required: 
 
ELD 1 
ELD 2 
ELD 3 
ELD 4/5** 
45-59 minutes 
3 
2 
1 
1 
60-74 minutes 
2 
2 
1 
1 
75+ minutes 
2 
1 
1 
1 
*ESL for ELD 4-5 may be embedded into the ELA block by an ESL-
licensed teacher. This is only allowable for ELD levels 4 and 5. 
 
Please note:  
● Schools may leverage this framework, but may still opt to 
schedule ESL instruction based on the daily minutes 
specified in Table 2. 
● OMME recommends schools consider scheduling MLs for 
additional support from an ESL licensed teacher during 
Targeted Advisory / Intervention / WIN / SEL blocks (if 
available) based on the needs of their students and in the 
balance of other opportunities for students to access grade-
level core content, advanced learning, and specials 
alongside their English-proficient peers. Refer to the 
resource below for sample recommended schedules.  


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 20 of 36 
 
● Part-time students (i.e., those attending for 1 or 2 remaining 
credit requirements) who have fulfilled MassCore ELA 
graduation requirements, and / or are only enrolled in BPS 
for credit recovery or only online education (i.e., never 
physically at a school building), will not be required to be 
scheduled for ESL. These students are typically over-age 
students who are balancing work and other adult 
responsibilities. OMME highly recommends that these 
students have a direct connection with the Re-Engagement 
Center and have a dedicated counselor that can assist them 
in creating an educational pathway that works best for their 
home, family, and work obligations. Note: Schools may 
schedule these students for ESL if it will best support the 
student in meeting graduation requirements and their 
individual needs. Regardless, schools should still be 
scheduling these students for core content classes with an 
appropriately endorsed (SEI and/or Bilingual Endorsement) 
or ESL certified teacher. 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 21 of 36 
 
4B. ESL Instructional Types, Requirements, and 
Recommendations 
All requisite ESL Instruction must occur during an ESL-Eligible 
course as designated by the BPS course catalog (e.g. reading, 
writing, ELA, literacy / humanities). This is to ensure that ELs still 
have equitable access to other grade-level core content and 
specialty courses.  
Refer to the following tables for allowable types of ESL 
instructional models. 
 
TABLE 4: ESL INSTRUCTIONAL MODELS FOR MLS IN K2-5/6 
All instructional models require an ESL licensed teacher during 
the literacy/humanities block). 
Standalone ESL — For ELs in Gen Ed 
 A standalone section is a scheduled class for ESL students 
with an ESL licensed teacher. The student is not pulled out 
of classrooms to attend this class, it is a part of their student 
schedule (e.g., with an “ESL” course title). An ESL licensed 
teacher must be the teacher of record of this classroom. 
Standalone ESL is the recommended instructional model for 
ML students with an ELD of 1-3 in grades K2-5 who are not 
assigned to an SEI language-specific or SEI Multilingual 
program. 
For ELD 4-5: Standalone is an allowable option; however, 
refer to the Embed ELA model as an alternative if the 
ELA/homeroom teacher is ESL licensed.  
 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 22 of 36 
 
Push-In ESL 
Push-In ESL may be provided to ML students in Elementary 
grades (K2 to 5) when the ESL teacher is coming into an 
ELA/Humanities course (or via a co-teacher in the 
classroom) to provide ESL services for a specific, small group 
of students within the same classroom while other students 
continue to receive content instruction. Schools must 
adhere to ESL grouping requirements when utilizing this 
instructional method.  
At a minimum, weekly common planning time for the ESL 
and classroom teachers should be provided. 
Pull-Out ESL 
Pull-Out ESL may be provided to ML students in Elementary 
grades (K2 to 5) when a student is being taken out of an ELA 
/ Humanities course to receive ESL instruction. Schools must 
adhere to ESL grouping requirements when utilizing this 
instructional method.  
Embed Homeroom — ESL in formal SEI programs  
This is an instructional type allowable ONLY for ML students 
(ELD 1-3) in SEI language-specific or SEI multilingual 
programs at the Elementary grade level (K2 to 5/6). 
Please see section 5 of this circular for additional 
information on the criteria for a BPS SEI eligible ELD 3. 
In this model, students receive ESL instruction embedded 
during their literacy time (course titles: Reading and 
Writing). Teachers providing this embedded ESL instruction 
must be ESL licensed and are required to complete OMME 
designated PD on differentiation and lesson planning. 


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 23 of 36 
 
Embed ELA — ESL  
For ML students with ELD levels 4 and 5 only, the 
recommended instructional model for ESL is for ESL to be 
embedded in core ELA or literacy courses, only by an ESL 
licensed teacher. Students at these ELD levels may be 
grouped together. 
 
 
Inclusion Teacher ESL Stipend per BTU CBA 
For special education inclusion classrooms only that utilize a 1.0 
teacher model, where the teacher is using 3 licenses (two of 
which are special education and ESL), this ESL-licensed teacher 
of record may agree to be stipended (45 minutes per day at the 
BTU contractual hourly rate) to provide ESL instruction for ELD 4-
5 students that is embedded into the ELA or literacy block (ESL 
Embed ELA). Alternatively, if the teacher does not agree to the 
stipend, ESL instruction for ELD 4-5 students must be provided 
by a separate ESL licensed teacher. All ML (ELD 1-5) students are 
entitled to receive ESL services regardless of the teacher/stipend 
model. 
 
 
 


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 24 of 36 
 
TABLE 5: TYPES OF ESL INSTRUCTIONAL MODELS FOR MLS IN 
GRADES 6-12 
ESL 
Instruction 
Type 
Description (all instructional models require  
an ESL licensed teacher) 
Standalone 
ESL 
 
● For ELD levels 1 to 3, this is the only 
compliant instructional model for ESL service 
delivery for students. 
● Standalone is an allowable option for which 
ELD 4-5 students may be grouped together; 
however, refer to the Embed ELA mode 
below as the recommended instructional 
type if the ELA teacher is ESL licensed.  
Embed ELA 
ESL in English 
Language Arts  
● For ML students with ELD levels 4 and 5 only, 
the recommended instructional model for 
ESL is for ESL to be embedded in core ELA or 
literacy courses, only by an ESL licensed 
teacher. Students at these ELD levels may be 
grouped together. 
 
 
 


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 25 of 36 
 
4C. ESL Instructional Grouping Requirements 
The following table represents allowable groupings of students 
for ESL instruction. 
TABLE 6: ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY ESL GROUPING 
ACROSS ELD AND GRADE LEVELS 
ELD Levels 
Elementary Grades  
K2 to 5/6 
Secondary Grades  
6/7 to 12 
ELD 1 
● With fellow ELD 1 only 
across two consecutive 
grades; OR 
● With ELD 2 in one grade 
level 
● With fellow ELD 1 across 
multiple grades; OR 
● With ELD 2 only in one 
grade level 
ELD 2 
● With ELD 1 in one grade 
level; OR 
● With fellow ELD 2 only, in 
one grade level or across 
up to two consecutive 
grades; OR 
● With ELD 3 only in one 
grade level 
● With fellow ELD 2 only 
across multiple grades; 
OR 
● With ELD 1 only in one 
grade level; OR 
● With ELD 3 only in one 
grade level 
ELD 3  
● With ELD 2 in one grade 
level, preferably ELD 2.5-
2.9; OR 
● With fellow ELD 3 only, in 
one grade level or across 
up to two consecutive 
grades; OR 
● With ELD 2 in one grade 
level, preferably ELD 2.5-
2.9; OR 
● With fellow ELD 3 only 
across multiple grades, 
preferably two 
consecutive grade levels 
(e.g., in grades 9-10); OR 


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 26 of 36 
 
ELD Levels 
Elementary Grades  
K2 to 5/6 
Secondary Grades  
6/7 to 12 
● With ELD 4 in one grade 
level 
● With ELD 4, in one grade 
level in a standalone 
setting 
ELD 4 
● With ELD 3 in one grade 
level; OR 
● With ELD 5 in one grade 
level; OR 
● With fellow ELD 4 only 
across two consecutive 
grades 
● With ELD 3 in one grade 
level in a standalone 
setting; OR 
● With ELD 5 in one grade 
level; OR 
● With fellow ELD 4 only 
across multiple grades 
ELD 5 
● With ELD 4 in one grade 
level; OR 
● With fellow ELD 5 only 
across two consecutive 
grades 
● With ELD 4 in one grade 
level; OR 
● With fellow ELD 5 only 
across multiple grades 
Allowable Exceptions: 
SEI Language 
Specific or 
Multilingual 
Program (ELD 
1-3) 
● ELD 1-3 of the same SEI 
program homeroom may 
be grouped together for 
ESL instruction* 
● This grouping is not 
allowable at the 
secondary level. 
HILT for SLIFE 
● ELs, regardless of ELD 
level or grade level, in the 
same HILT for SLIFE 
● ELs, regardless of ELD 
level or grade level, in the 
same HILT for SLIFE 


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 27 of 36 
 
ELD Levels 
Elementary Grades  
K2 to 5/6 
Secondary Grades  
6/7 to 12 
Programs (4) 
program homeroom may 
be grouped together for 
ESL instruction. 
program homeroom may 
be grouped together for 
ESL instruction. 
MLWD (with 
approved ESL 
modifications) 
● Refer to the ELSWD ESL 
Modifications section for 
guidance. 
● Refer to the ELSWD ESL 
Modifications section for 
guidance. 
*Subject to the terms of DOJ Paragraph 39e. 
 
 
 
 
4() The META Consent Decree defines BPS HILT for SLIFE 
programs as “self-contained, ungraded, elementary format 
classroom with two teachers [Native Literacy Content teacher 
and ESL teacher] responsible for all instruction.” Students in the 
program are typically ELD 1 but may be at an ELD 2 level as they 
progress in their English language acquisition until meeting the 
exit criteria required by the consent decree. Therefore, students 
in this program model may receive ESL grouped in this manner. 


Page 28:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 28 of 36 
 
4D. Educator Licensure and Endorsement Requirements 
Please Note: 
Per DESE (603 CMR 14.07 (3)), no EL student can be placed in 
classrooms where the teachers lack the SEI Endorsement for two 
or more consecutive years. (5)  
● School Leaders are to keep detailed electronic records of all 
teachers who are in the process of obtaining the SEI or 
Bilingual Education Endorsement and the pathway that 
they are pursuing to meet this obligation. All ML (ELD 1-5) 
must be assigned to core content (and vocational, if 
applicable) classrooms where the teachers are already 
endorsed or in a confirmed pathway.  
● When creating schedules, schools must take into 
consideration teachers who are newly hired and who are 
returning but lack the SEI endorsement.  
● It is recommended that students who have reclassified to 
Former English Learner status be scheduled with SEI-
endorsed teachers for their core content courses, especially 
at the start of their 4-year monitoring period. 
● For any SEI Language-Specific / Multilingual elementary 
teacher to provide embed HR ESL to students at ELD 1-3, 
they must have both an ESL license and have completed 
OMME-approved training on differentiation of ESL and 
lesson planning, as part of the qualifications for this 
program, to ensure that the unique needs of students at 
ELD levels 1-3 are met (DOJ Paragraph 39e). Please also 
reference the 2018-2021 BTU Collective Bargaining 
 
5The teacher in this instance would also be required to get the SEI 
endorsement. 


Page 29:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 29 of 36 
 
Agreement (p. 49 section 11) as it pertains to this 
requirement. Teachers are expected to complete this 
training by the end of the school year. If the teacher has not 
satisfied these requirements, the school must ensure an ESL 
licensed teacher is scheduled to deliver the appropriate 
English language development instruction to ML students 
for the literacy portion of the day.  
The following table outlines DESE educator licensure and 
endorsement requirements in order to instruct ML (ELD 1-5) 
students by job type. 
 
 


Page 30:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 30 of 36 
 
TABLE 7: TEACHER QUALIFICATION BY JOB TYPE 
Job Type 
Required 
Qualification 
Additional Information 
ESL 
Teacher 
ESL License 
Individuals who have completed and passed all 
requisite coursework / requirements and are 
only waiting for the state to administratively 
grant the ESL license may also be assigned to 
teach ESL. 
Core 
Content or 
Vocational 
Teacher 
(English) 
SEI 
Endorsement 
(Teacher) 
 
Core Content Teachers: 
● teachers of students with moderate or 
severe disabilities; subject-area teachers in 
English, reading or language arts; 
mathematics, science; civics and 
government, economics, history, and 
geography and early childhood and 
elementary teachers who teach such 
content.  
Vocational (CVTE) Teachers: 
● For purposes of SEI, CVTE is defined as 
programs approved under M.G.L. c. 74; 
programs that meet the definition of career 
and technical education listed in the Carl D. 
Perkins Career and Technical Education 
Improvement Act of 2006, 20 U.S.C. § 2302(5); 
and any other programs that may be 
designated by the DESE Commissioner such 
as automotive technology, carpentry, 
culinary arts, engineering, exploratory, 
masonry, information technology, and any 
other subjects listed by DESE. 


Page 31:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 31 of 36 
 
Core 
Content or 
Vocational 
Teacher 
(Native / 
Partner 
Language) 
BEE 
Endorsement 
Core Content and CVTE Teachers as defined 
above who: 
● Instruct in the partner language of a formal 
BPS dual language program 
● Instruct in the partner language of a formal 
language specific HILT for SLIFE program 
 
Evaluator 
of ML 
Teacher 
(English) 
SEI 
Endorsement 
(Administrator 
or Teacher) 
A principal, assistant principal, supervisor, or 
director ("administrator") who supervises or 
evaluates one or more core academic teachers 
of ML (ELD 1-5) students 
Evaluator 
of ML 
Teacher 
(Native / 
Partner 
Language) 
BEE 
Endorsement 
 
OR 
 
SEI 
Endorsement 
(Administrator 
or Teacher) 
Evaluators as defined above who supervise a 
core academic teacher assigned to provide 
instruction to an English Learner in a bilingual 
ELE program 
Substitute 
Teachers 
N/A 
If for any ESL or core content class, no teacher 
is available who meets the qualifications to 
instruct ML (ELD 1-5) students, school leaders 
shall, to the extent practicable, assign 
substitute teachers who are ESL-licensed for 
ESL instruction or who are SEI or Bilingual 
Education-endorsed (for core content classes).  
 
The following table outlines DESE educator licensure and 
endorsement requirements in order to instruct ML (ELD 1-5) 
students by BPS ELE program model. 


Page 32:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 32 of 36 
 
TABLE 8: EXAMPLES OF LICENSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
POSITIONS SERVING EL STUDENTS* 
Program 
BPS 
Teacher 
Title 
Position 
Description 
Required 
Licensure 
Preferred 
 
 
 
 
BPS SEI 
SEI Multi-
lingual 
General ed. 
position in a 
classroom that 
includes students 
with ELD levels 1-
3 and varying 
native languages 
Content area 
license & SEI 
endorsement 
ESL License 
and SEI PD  
SEI + 
[Specific 
Language] 
e.g. SEI 
Spanish 
General ed. 
position in a 
classroom that 
includes students 
with ELD levels 1-
3 of the same 
native language 
Content area 
license & SEI 
endorsement 
ESL 
License, SEI 
PD, and 
Oral fluency 
in students’ 
primary 
language 
ESL 
ESL 
Teacher 
(incl. SLIFE 
ESL) 
Provides ESL 
instruction only 
(regardless of ELE 
program model) 
ESL license 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bilingual 
Two-Way + 
[Specific 
Language] 
e.g., 
Bilingual 
Serves multiple 
classrooms to 
provide periods of 
instruction in a 
language other 
than English 
Content area 
license & Bilingual 
Education 
Endorsement (if 
teaching in native 
language)  
 


Page 33:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 33 of 36 
 
Dual 
Lang-
uage/ 
Two-way 
Two-Way 
Spanish 
(complementary 
position below) 
(Note: if the 
teacher is 
providing ESL, the 
teacher must have 
the ESL License) 
Bilingual 
Two-Way 
English 
Serves multiple 
classrooms to 
provide periods of 
English 
instruction to 
students 
(complementary 
position above) 
Content area 
license & either SEI 
Endorsement or 
Bilingual 
Education 
Endorsement 
(Note: if the 
teacher is 
providing ESL, the 
teacher must have 
the ESL License) 
 
 
SLIFE 
SLIFE 
Native 
Literacy 
(TBE) 
teacher 
Provides core 
content 
instruction to 
SLIFE students in 
the student’s 
native language 
(language other 
than English) 
A Core Content 
area license & 
Bilingual 
Education 
Endorsement  
 
5. SY23-24 ELD AND ELP LEVELING GUIDANCE 
For the 2023-2024 school year, the Office of Multilingual and 
Multicultural Education is continuing the transition of 
Multilingual Learner students’ English Language Development 
Level (ELD Level) to Multilingual Learner students’ English 
Language Proficiency Level (ELP Level). This shift aligns all 


Page 34:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 34 of 36 
 
students’ ELP levels with their WIDA ACCESS 2.0 scores and 
aligns our guidance and policies for Multilingual Learner students 
and Multilingual Learner Education with the guidance and 
policies of the Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education. The following table shows the updated ACCESS and 
Alt ACCESS score to ELP level crosswalk. 
TABLE 9: ACCESS SCORE CROSSWALK 
2022 ACCESS and Alt ACCESS 
Score Range  
 
SY 23-24 English Language 
Development (ELD) / English 
Language Proficiency (ELP) 
Levels 
ACCESS: 1.0 - 1.9 / ACCESS Alt: A1-P1 
Level 1 (Foundational)  
ACCESS: 2.0-2.9 / ACCESS Alt: P2 
Level 2 (Foundational)  
ACCESS: 3.0-3.4 / ACCESS Alt: P3 
Level 3  (Foundational)  
ACCESS: 3.5-3.9 / ACCESS Alt: P3 
Level 3 (Transitional)  
ACCESS: 4.0 - 4.9 
Level 4 (Transitional)  
ACCESS: 5.0-5.9 
Level 5 (Transitional)  
ACCESS: 4.2 with 3.9 literacy  
(i.e., meets state exit criteria) 
Former EL 
 
Please note: 
● Annual program placement recommendations are based on 
students’ ELP level, and OMME will assume the 
responsibility of using the annual program notification form 
to notify parents of program placement. 


Page 35:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 35 of 36 
 
● Consecutive year ELD 3 students will be automatically 
exited from BPS SEI Language Specific or Multilingual 
program placement if they currently occupy such a seat. 
○ Per DOJ, consecutive year ELD 3 students may not be 
grouped together with ELD 1-2 students for their ESL 
instruction. 
● Transitional ELD 3 students (students who received an 
ACCESS overall score of 3.5-3.9) will be automatically exited 
from BPS SEI Language Specific or Multilingual program 
placement if they currently occupy such a seat. 
● Students who scored lower on their ACCESS test than their 
previous ELD level will be held harmless. 
● Students who did not take the ACCESS or complete ACCESS 
due to absence or other circumstance will retain their 
previous ELD level. 
● Students who did not take all domains of ACCESS due to an 
SPD code will receive their appropriate levels and program 
placements according to the policies listed above upon 
release of their ACCESS overall score by the state in early fall. 
► Resource: End of Year Leveling Guidance 22-23 
 
 
 
 


Page 36:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-05 
Page 36 of 36 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Linda Chen, Senior Deputy Superintendent of 
Academics and Interim Assistant 
Superintendent of OMME 
Department: 
Office of Multilingual and Multicultural 
Education (OMME) 
Mailing Address: Bolling Building, 2300 Washington Street, 6th 
Floor, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9435 
Email: 
OMMEequityteam@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


