Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 
NUMBER: 
CAO-06 
Version 01 
 
 
 
 GRADE POINT AVERAGE CALCULATION METHOD 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
RATIONALE 
The purpose of this document is to outline how grade point 
averages (GPAs) are calculated and used within the Boston 
Public Schools. 
DEFINITION 
The grade point average (GPA) is a standard numerical 
conversion of letter grades given to a student. The GPA is a 
standard method of comparing the cumulative academic 
performance of students in grades 9-12 and sharing that 
information. The GPA is used for several purposes such as college 
admissions, high school ranking, and selective program 
admissions. The GPA calculation takes in a variety of information 
from courses such as credits and academic level.   
GPA CALCULATIONS 
Use the following steps to complete the weighted GPA 
calculation:  
Step 1. Convert each final grade (numeric or letter grade) to 
its equivalent on the 4.0 scale.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-06 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
 
Step 2. Weight grades by adding .5 to each converted grade 
earned in an Honors level course and 1.0 to each converted 
grade earned in Advanced Placement or Dual Enrollment 
course.  
Step 3. Multiply each converted grade or, if applicable, each 
weighted grade by the course credits earned. Where a full-
year course equals 1 credit; a semester course equals .5 
credits; a quarter course equals .25 credits. 
Step 4. Sum all the weighted grade points from Step 3.  
Step 5. Divide total from Step 4 by total number of course 
credits attempted.  Where a full-year course equals 1 credit; 
a semester course equals .5 credits; a quarter course 
equals .25 credits. 
Step 6. The quotient is the student's weighted GPA. 
GPA = Total (Point + Weight) * Credit) for all courses / Total 
Credits for all courses 
COURSE INFORMATION 
1. Course 
a. Student courses taken in grades 9-12 will be included in 
the GPA calculation. High school level courses taken by 
a student in middle school grades will not be included 
in the calculation.  
b. Include in GPA or InGPA flag 
c. This indicator describes the courses that will be 
included in any academic GPA calculation. Courses 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-06 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
 
that are required for graduation are included in GPA 
calculations. Courses that typically are excluded from 
academic GPA calculations include enrichment 
courses, functional courses, study periods and 
administration blocks such as lunch. The district 
determines which courses are included within a 
student’s GPA calculation, additionally such courses 
may also be required by schools for graduation. The 
Division of Academics maintains and updates the list of 
all applicable courses to be included in the GPA 
calculation. School users can find InGPA information in 
the Course Catalog feature in Aspen. 
2. Credits 
a. Credits describe the number of ‘points’ that a course 
will receive in a GPA after the course is completed. In 
general, most courses will have 1 credit. However, 
certain courses may have more than 1 credit, such as 
double-blocked humanities courses. Similarly, some 
courses have fewer than 1 credit, such as 1 semester 
(half-year) courses. In the cumulative GPA calculation 
within a school year, quarter or term grades for a 1 
semester course will be attributed .25 credits in the 
GPA calculation. 
b. Credits are generally distributed based on the 
successful completion of the competencies of the 
course. 
c. Transfer-in credits are credits that a student earns in a 
setting outside of BPS. These credits are included on a 
student’s transcript and count towards a school’s 
graduation requirements. Therefore, these credits will 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-06 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
 
be used in the GPA calculation. This is in alignment 
with the Massachusetts Board of Higher Education’s 
(MA BHE) process of calculating GPAs.  
3. Academic level 
a. The academic level of a course can be one of 8 options 
(see table below). 
b. Weights are applied to courses through the academic 
level of the course. The following weights are given to 
each academic level based on the MA Board of Higher 
Education recommendations (Link to full weighting 
chart). 
 
Weighting 
Course Academic Level 
Not included 
Functional 
Untracked 
 
+0 (standard) 
Regular 
 
 
+0.5 
Honors 
IB MYP 
 
+1.0 
College 
AP 
IB DP 
 
GPA CALCULATION DATES (BPS CALENDAR) 
The GPA calculation dates for SY24 can be found here.  
GPA INCLUDED IN TRANSCRIPT 
While there are several GPA calculations in Aspen, only the 
cumulative weighted academic GPA calculation is included on a 
student’s official transcript. The quarter, semester, and final GPAs 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-06 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
 
are saved throughout the school year but will be overwritten 
each year. The final cumulative GPA (accumulation over grades 9-
12) as of the current year is saved in Aspen and transferred to the 
Data Warehouse. 
HELPFUL LINKS 
Grade Point Average (GPA) Help Guides for Aspen 
Weighting Chart 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Teaching and Learning 
Department: 
Office of Teaching & Learning 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-6053 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


