Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-08 
Version 01 
 
 
 
GRADING REQUIREMENTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The spirit of this policy is to move away from the practice of 
grading non-academic behavior and to the timely provision of 
meaningful feedback to every family on every student’s 
academic progress. This policy is a critical part of propelling all 
students toward the Strategic Plan and School Committee goals 
centered on college, career, and life readiness. As well, it will 
ensure that grading practices are accurate, bias-resistant, 
motivational, and coherent in the district, which will in turn 
ensure the ability of our stakeholders to trust the district’s 
commitment to equity. This policy will provide accurate, 
dignifying feedback to every student about where they are 
academically and what they need to be successful. As a vehicle 
for closing opportunity and achievement gaps, the grading policy 
will provide clear and comprehensive guidance that aligns to our 
teaching practices, family engagement, and student experience, 
grounded in equity and research. With the School Committee's 
approval of this policy, the Academics and Schools divisions will 
work in collaboration with our stakeholders this spring to finalize 
and enact an implementation plan that focuses on the adaptive 
work ahead.  
The Boston Public Schools will at all times maintain 
Superintendent’s Circulars that: (1) outline procedures for 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-08 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 
maintenance of grades to ensure that they are accurate, timely, 
and aligned to DESE standards; (2) outline a common report card 
structure and timeline for schools by grade span and program; 
and (3) outline allowable flexibilities.  
Separately, as a companion to this policy, the district will develop 
and maintain detailed implementation processes in the form of 
Superintendent’s Circulars ensuring:  
1. Implementation of MassCore graduation requirements and 
waivers 
2. Common GPA calculation and transcription processes 
3. A common process for promotion to the next grade level 
4. A common process for retention at the current grade level 
5. A common and public course catalog that details for 
students and families course of study options for all 
secondary schools as well as course descriptions, credit, and 
governance 
6. An updated process and calendar for course creation.  
ADOPTION OF A COMMON GRADING POLICY FOR THE BOSTON 
PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
The School Committee of the Boston Public Schools is 
responsible for creating policies and practices that support the 
preparation of every student to be college, career, and life-ready 
and remove barriers that interfere with students graduating from 
BPS ready to succeed in the next stage of their lives. If we 
support BPS educators to effectively use culturally responsive 
practices, provide high levels of support, and adopt coherent 
grading practices that are mathematically accurate, bias-
resistant, and motivational for students, then we will see 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-08 
Page 3 of 6 
 
 
increased student engagement, and grades that reflect student 
learning. 
BPS will adopt the following policy for all students in the district. 
Specifically, the following practices will be required of all 
educators in the district.  
PROPOSED: 
Grading Practice 
Why is it more equitable?  
Accuracy and timeliness Educators will ensure that term grades follow 
the practices laid out in the BPS Grading Policy 
and are posted in Aspen by the closing date 
according to the district grading calendar.  
“No Credit” grades will 
no longer be given. 
As an alternative, schools may mark a student 
with an “incomplete” to enable equitable 
learning recovery. 
In all cases, a student not earning a passing 
grade must be given the opportunity and 
responsibility to equitably recover any learning 
loss or make up for the work missed within one 
marking period. 
No penalties will be 
given for late work. 
Deadlines will be given for work, and we expect 
students to meet these expectations. Deadlines 
will be explained to students.  When a student 
turns in the assignment, it will be graded, and 
the grade in ASPEN/SMS will reflect student 
mastery (not the tardiness of the work). 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-08 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 
Grading Practice 
Why is it more equitable?  
A minimum grading (50 
for an assignment on a 
0-100 scale) will be used. 
 
Teachers will determine minimum grades for 
assignments where the lowest possible grade is 
balanced with the value of the highest grade. 
Best practices would include the 
implementation of a consistent numerical 
grading scale (0-4, 1-7, etc.) that aligns to GPA 
scale. 
Demonstration of 
competency in 
summative tasks must 
make up at least 80% of 
term grades. 
Grades for assignments should be 
representative of what students have 
demonstrated in terms of their learning, and 
not non-academic behaviors.  
Students will receive 
consistent feedback on 
assignments before 
students are formally 
assessed.  
Teachers are intentional about taking time to 
give students clear and actionable feedback. 
Students understand what the criteria for 
success are for any given assignment and have 
clear actions steps for getting there. We 
understand the importance of coherence in the 
ways we provide feedback and are committed 
to making this an instructional focus for the 
upcoming school year to better support our 
staff. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-08 
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
Grading Practice 
Why is it more equitable?  
Middle/High School: A 
consistent, agreed-upon 
number of assignments 
per grade; and 
consistent intervals for 
grading updates in 
Aspen/SMS. 
Teachers are expected to post at least one 
visible grade on ASPEN/SMS every week for 
middle and high school students.  
Elementary School: A 
consistent approach 
across all content areas 
(including speciality 
classes) for providing 
students and families 
formative feedback 
routinely. 
Schools serving elementary grades are required 
to have a consistent approach for providing 
students and families formative feedback 
weekly. Students are required to receive term 
grades for Language Arts, Math, History/Social 
Studies, Science, and any specialty classes 
offered.  
All grade levels 
Students may only receive a composite grade 
for “Humanities” or “STEM” or equivalent if the 
course is offered at the equivalent of a double 
block. As well, students must receive formative 
and summative feedback on both grade level 
language arts and history/social studies or math 
and science concepts and meet all the 
requirements above.  
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-08 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Elementary Superintendent 
Department: 
Academics and Professional Learning 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington St. Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-6053 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


