Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-03 
Version 01 
 
TEXTBOOK MANAGEMENT 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
School Committee policy and state law recognize the student's 
right to use textbooks, on a loan basis, without charge. As a 
public school system, we have a responsibility to supply our 
students with the textbooks and other materials they need for 
school use. Accordingly, School Committee policy states that "no 
student should be required to furnish or pay for any books or 
other materials for school use, with the exception of materials 
used for certain practical arts projects that result in items that 
belong to the student after the project's completion." 
School Committee policy and state law also recognize the 
student's responsibility to use and not abuse or lose these same 
textbooks and materials. School Committee policy states that 
"students will be required to pay for textbooks and other school-
owned materials that they lose or damage" (ref. Student Fees, 
Fines and Charges - Policy File).  Under Massachusetts law, the 
sums recovered from pupils in the public schools for loss of 
schoolbooks … may be used by the School Committee for the 
replacement of such books or materials ... (M.G.L. c.44, §53). 
As school leaders and teachers, we are concerned that resources 
be maximized and not misused.  Instructional material costs are 
significant. It is important that school leaders, teachers, students, 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 2 of 12 
 
and parents understand and adhere to our policies and 
procedures for the care of textbooks and other instructional 
materials. The following guidelines, based on long-standing 
School Committee policy, have been established and should be 
followed for the lending of books to pupils. 
PREPARATION, STORAGE, AND CONTROL OF TEXTBOOKS 
● All textbooks and library books shall be numbered and an 
inventory maintained by the school leader.  School 
Committee policy requires that "Heads of school/principals 
will be responsible for and will keep complete records of all 
books... and other instructional materials furnished to their 
schools."  The inventory should include: 
○ Title of book 
○ Author 
○ Publisher and year of publication 
○ Date of purchase (for all books purchased for SY21 and 
beyond) 
○ Class subject for which it is used (textbooks) 
○ Name of teachers to whom the textbooks are issued 
(textbooks) 
● All textbooks should be stamped with the school name on 
the inside of the front cover. Each textbook should be 
numbered and recorded on the inside of the front cover. 
● All textbooks shall be stored in secure rooms, lockers, or 
cabinets.  Principals/heads of school or their designees shall 
ensure that a record is maintained of every textbook that is 
removed from storage. 
● Principals/heads of school shall ensure that teachers 
maintain an inventory of textbooks that includes the 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 3 of 12 
 
condition of the text and who it is assigned to for each 
quarter, trimester, semester, or year. 
● Principals/heads of school should work with teachers, 
students, and parents to raise their awareness of the 
importance of caring for and replacing textbooks. The Guide 
to the Boston Public Schools for Families and Students 
references this information. School-based rules should 
outline the rules and responsibilities for using textbooks and 
the penalties for violations.  
TEACHER’S RESPONSIBILITY 
● Teachers should maintain a record of the title, the textbook 
number, and the name of the pupil to whom each textbook 
is lent and should check periodically that students have the 
textbook assigned. Librarians must establish and maintain 
an appropriate inventory control system and loan procedure 
for all library books, materials and equipment assigned to 
the school library. 
● Teachers should encourage students in the proper care, 
including covering, of loaned textbooks. 
STUDENT’S RESPONSIBILITY 
● The book is to be returned to the principal of the school or 
to the teacher authorized to receive it at any time required 
by them and in as good condition as when received, 
allowance being made for the wear and damage caused by 
careful use. 
● If lost or damaged by carelessness or accident beyond what 
may be reasonably allowed, the book is to be replaced by 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 4 of 12 
 
the pupil to whom it is loaned and as required by the School 
Committee. 
● Written notice of any previous defacement is required when 
the book is received. 
● Damage by marking, tearing, etc. is not allowed. 
● Students who transfer within the Boston Public Schools or 
who leave the school system shall return all textbooks and 
library books to the schools that loaned the books. 
Principals/heads of school should notify appropriate staff 
(e.g., registrars, guidance counselors) to make a note on the 
appropriate sign-out forms of any student leaving school 
who has not paid the replacement costs of lost or damaged 
books. High school seniors should not be allowed to sign out 
on the last day for seniors (i.e., day 170) without returning or 
making restitution for a lost or damaged book.  A copy of 
any open account form should be retained in the temporary 
record of any student who does not pay the replacement 
cost of a damaged or lost book. 
● Students who transfer within the Boston Public Schools 
should not be loaned textbooks or library books in their 
receiving schools until they have returned or arranged to 
replace all their books from their sending school. 
PARENT RESPONSIBILITY 
● Parents should be informed of textbook loan and/or library 
book loan conditions at the beginning of the school year.  
Notification should be made in the form of a letter to 
parents in the language of the home and in any newsletters 
sent home to parents at the start of the school year.   


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 5 of 12 
 
● Parents of students who lose or damage textbooks and/or 
library books should be informed by the principal/head of 
school, in writing, within 30 days of learning of the 
loss/damage and the cost of replacement. 
REPLACEMENT OF TEXTBOOKS  
● If a student damages or loses a textbook and/or a library 
book and the student and parent refuses to make 
restitution, a replacement book must be made available for 
classroom or library use.  However, restrictions may be 
imposed (e.g., students may use text only during class but 
may not take the text out of the classroom). 
● If a student damages or loses a textbook or library book and 
the student and parent continue to refuse to make 
restitution by the start of the following school years, the 
student will be subject to penalties under school-based 
rules. 
● With respect to penalties for students who do not pay the 
replacement costs of lost or damaged books, 
principals/heads of school should involve the School Site 
Council in establishing school-based rules and 
corresponding penalties. These penalties might include but 
not be limited to prohibiting the student from attending 
certain school activities not related to the instructional 
program.  Before any penalty is imposed, the principal/head 
of school must provide advance written notice to the 
student and their parents/guardians. The written notice 
must provide the student and their parents/guardians with 
an opportunity to remedy the situation prior to actual 
imposition of the penalty.  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 6 of 12 
 
● An appeals process should be provided to address issues 
such as claims of “hardship” or improper assessment of 
damages (e.g., the loss or damage of a book which is not the 
result of the student’s negligence, parent has proof that 
payment was made, etc.). All appeals should be heard by the 
principal/head of school, who should issue a written 
decision, a copy of which should be forwarded to the parent 
and a copy of which should be filed in the student’s 
temporary record.  In addition, flexibility in the method of 
payment should be offered (e.g., school service projects 
being performed by the student in lieu of dollar payment is 
one possibility). 
● All funds collected for lost or damaged textbooks and/or 
library books should be forwarded by principals/heads of 
school to the business manager for deposit in a revolving 
account for the purchase of replacement textbooks.  The 
business manager will allocate the revolving account book 
funds, giving priority to the schools that collected money for 
lost/damaged books. 
TEXTBOOK INVENTORY AND REPLACEMENT PLANS 
● Before budget collaborative, principals/heads of school shall 
estimate their textbook needs for the following school year, 
based on textbooks checks and on projected student 
enrollment and shall develop a textbook replacement plan. 
Instructional Leadership Teams and School Site Councils 
should be involved in the development of the replacement 
plan. Replacement books should be ordered by individual 
schools. Texts that are part of curriculum adoption of BPS-
recommended curricula or those that will be used in new 
classrooms will be purchased by central office.  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 7 of 12 
 
● In June, at the end of the school year, principals/heads of 
school shall conduct a thorough inventory of textbooks.  
● Principals/heads of school shall maintain a record of every 
student who does not arrange to replace textbooks that are 
lost or damaged. The record should include the book receipt 
signed by the student when the book was loaned. 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
By the end of the 2nd 
week of school 
Principals/heads of school send letters 
to families regarding district textbook 
policy. 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 8 of 12 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Teaching and Learning 
Department: 
Office of Teaching & Learning 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9000 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 9 of 12 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
 
Dear Parent/Guardian: 
As the new school year begins and we loan textbooks and other 
resource materials to our students, I would like to ask for the help 
of all parents.  We need your help if we are to reduce the number 
of lost and damaged books.  Textbooks are very expensive today, 
many costing as much as $60.00 each.  We have worked hard 
over the past two years to update and replace our books. As a 
result, most of our textbooks are less than five years old and are 
in good condition. 
Some subjects or courses may not use a textbook; instead, they 
use reference books, original source documents, and/or library 
research materials.  
Please work with your child and with us to keep our books in 
good condition.  I ask that you remind your child of the following: 
● All textbooks and library books are the property of the 
Boston Public Schools and are loaned for the use of 
students while they are enrolled. 
● All textbooks and library books used for classroom work and 
homework should be respected and returned in good 
condition. 
● Students/parents are accountable for books and must pay 
for the replacement of lost or damaged books. 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 10 of 12 
 
● All textbooks that are taken home by students should be 
covered. 
All materials used to support classroom instruction, all textbooks, 
library books and resource materials should be cared for so that 
they can be used by other students in the future. I appreciate 
your assistance and cooperation in this effort and thank you for 
your help. 
Our best wishes to you and your child for a successful school 
year. 
Sincerely yours, 
 
 
 
Principal/Head of School 
 
 
School 
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 11 of 12 
 
File: EDB-R 
 
MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL OF MATERIALS AND 
EQUIPMENT 
Heads of school/principals will be responsible for and will keep 
complete records of all books, globes, maps, charts, apparatus 
and computers, and other state-of-the-art instructional materials 
furnished to their schools. 
 
Approved prior to 1988. 
Policy Manual, School Committee of the City of Boston 
 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-03  
Page 12 of 12 
 
 
FORM 134 
Boston Public Schools 
PUPIL'S BOOK RECEIPT 
Date: 
 
Subject: 
 
Teacher: 
 
Received: 
 
Number:  
 
I promise to return in good order or replace with a new one. 
Room:  _____________ 
Pupil's Signature: 
 
Form 134    9/98 
 


