Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FNS-04 
Version 01 
 
1 
RESPONSIBILITIES REGARDING SCHOOL  
FOOD SERVICES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Food and Nutrition services is a federally funded program. The 
program’s operating revenue is supported by reimbursement 
from meals served to students. The department is audited 
annually, consisting of a review of the Community Eligibility 
Program which includes point of service, accountability, fiscal 
accountability, and overall procedures. 
School leaders share responsibility with the executive director of 
Food and Nutrition Services in ensuring that all federal, state, and 
local regulations applicable to the school’s food services are 
implemented and administered daily. There are area field 
coordinators who are assigned to oversee school-site foodservice 
operations.  
SCHOOL LUNCH AND BREAKFAST PROGRAMS  
Breakfast and Lunch Periods:  
● The state mandates sufficient time must be allocated for 
the students to eat lunch. At least a 30-minute lunch 
period is recommended, whenever possible. No less than 
20 minutes can be designated for a lunch period.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 2 of 10 
 
● If there is a change to the meal service time, the school 
leader must notify the Food Services staff immediately. 
Any changes to service impacts staffing and must be 
reviewed and discussed before finalizing.  
● Breakfast programs should be scheduled at least 15 to 30 
minutes before the start of school. This time is needed for 
Food Services staff to have the necessary capability for 
accurate meal counting and reporting.  
● Supervision is required at breakfast as well as lunch 
service. The school leader can make an administrative 
assignment or arrange for volunteers to provide student 
supervision. Food Service employees will not assume 
responsibility for supervising students.  
Breakfast After the Bell: 
As a continuation from SY2018-2019, the Massachusetts State 
Budget mandates public schools with at least 60 percent of their 
student population eligible for free or reduced-price meals to 
serve breakfast after the instructional day begins. All BPS schools 
must comply with this regulation.  
FNS understands implementing a change in breakfast service 
style has its challenges and has several resources available 
including marketing, equipment, and programs to ensure proper 
implementation of a comprehensive breakfast after the bell 
program that provides access to meals. FNS will keep cafeterias 
open 30 minutes past the bell time to continue provision of 
breakfast to all students. 
 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 3 of 10 
 
Lunch Menu:  
Federal regulations mandate lunch to consist of the following: 
● Meat or meat alternates  
● Whole grains  
● Vegetables 
● Fruits 
● Milk  
Breakfast Menu:  
Federal regulations mandate breakfast to consist of the 
following: 
● Meat or meat alternates  
● Whole grains 
● Fruits 
● Vegetables 
● Milk  
The menu as printed must be followed by FNS staff unless onsite 
food service staff receive approval from Food Services supervisory 
staff to make adjustments. Menu planning is the sole 
responsibility of the Department of Food and Nutrition Services. 
School administrators are encouraged to discuss their menu 
interest with the executive director of food services, 617-635-9144.  
COMMUNITY ELIGIBILITY PROGRAM  
This school year (2023-2024), in conjunction with the United 
States Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the Massachusetts 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education, Boston 
Public Schools (BPS) will continue to participate in the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 4 of 10 
 
Community Eligibility Provision (CEP), created by the Healthy, 
Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010. This is available for schools with 
high percentages of low-income children to provide breakfast 
and lunch to all students at no cost to them. The program 
increases participation in school meals, reduces labor costs for 
schools, and brings additional revenue to the school district from 
the USDA. In short, it allows for a healthier student body and a 
healthier school meal budget.  
All students in a Community Eligibility Provision (CEP) school are 
deemed as economically disadvantaged, and students are 
provided all meals — breakfast, lunch, after-school meals, and 
summer meals — at no cost. In the event a student requests a 
second meal, the cost is $4.00 . Students must pay at the time of 
the meal request. There are no credits or charges allowed.  
School administrators may establish a revolving fund to cover the 
cost of second meals for students without means. Second meals 
will not be provided without a source of payment.  
AFTER SCHOOL MEAL PROGRAM  
Supper meals are available at no charge to schools that have 
after school enrichment programs. Program directors must 
contact this office to arrange for student meals. There is a brief 
application process that should be completed at least 2 weeks 
prior to program start-up. All program directors are required to 
attend one mandatory annual training session. Program 
administrators are responsible for completing the daily tally 
sheets to document meals served. Tardy submission of these 
reports could result in the discontinuance of the program. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 5 of 10 
 
SUMMER MEAL PROGRAM 
Meals are provided throughout the City of Boston to all children. 
Meals consist of breakfast and lunch and are free to all children 
through age 18. 
FRESH FRUIT AND VEGETABLE PROGRAM (FFVP) 
The goal of the FFVP is to introduce children to fresh fruits and 
vegetables, to include new and different varieties, and to increase 
overall acceptance and consumption of fresh, unprocessed 
produce among children. The FFVP also encourages healthier 
school environments by promoting nutrition education. 
USE OF SCHOOL LUNCH FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTION 
● The National School Lunch Act and the State Department 
of Elementary and Secondary Education prohibit the 
denial of meals and milk as disciplinary action against 
school children.  
● Students may not be denied any part of the meal.  
● Students may not have a portion of the breakfast or lunch 
period taken away.  
● Any action that interferes with the student’s right to 
access meals or that discriminates against students in 
any way in the provision of meals is prohibited.  
COMPLIANCE WITH PROGRAM REGULATIONS 
We ask that school administrators assist with the enforcement of 
program regulations (e.g., federal regulations do not permit free 
or reduced reimbursement to ineligible children. There is no 
reimbursement for adult meals.) School administration will be 
charged for meals in which payment has not been received for 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 6 of 10 
 
student second meals and adult meals. Outstanding charges will 
be posted against individual school instructional supply 
accounts. 
MEAL SERVICE ACCOUNTABILITY OF SCHOOL 
ADMINISTRATORS 
To participate in the school lunch and breakfast programs, it is 
necessary for a contract to be in effect between the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the superintendent of 
schools. This agreement stipulates that state-approved controls 
are maintained to account for meals served. 
● School administrators are required to comply with the 
approved system in operation at the particular school site. 
● To assist with decreasing meal waste and improving 
accountability, it is recommended that elementary 
teachers ask students beforehand who will be eating 
lunch in the cafeteria or classroom and give that 
information to the food service staff one hour before 
lunch so they can have more accurate counts.  
● School leaders are to ensure that all students know their 
student ID numbers, required to be entered at the point 
of sale for accountability of each meal. 
● Milk cannot be served without payment.  
● Meal counts must be taken at the “point of service” (end 
of the line) when a student has received a reimbursable 
meal. Five food components must be offered for lunch 
and three components for breakfast. 
● In schools with classroom meal service, it is necessary to 
account for the meal served at the time of service. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 7 of 10 
 
COMPETITIVE FOOD SALES AND VENDING MACHINES 
Regulations on competitive food sales in schools and vending 
machines are contained in regulations established by the 
Massachusetts Board of Education. Failure to follow these 
regulations may result in loss of federal funding (see FNS 03 
Nutrition Policy). 
Regulatory Authority: 
● M.G.L. C.15, § 1G 
● Federal Register, 2013, 7 CFR Parts 210 and 220, National 
School Lunch Program and School Breakfast Program: 
Nutrition Standards for All Foods Sold in Schools as 
Required by the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010; 
Interim Final Rule, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 78 (125) 
(June 28, 2013). 
● Federal Register, 2014, 7 CFR Parts 210 and 220, Local 
School Wellness Policy Implementation under the 
Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010: Proposed Rule, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, 79 (38) (February 26, 2014). 
● Massachusetts General Laws (2010). Chapter 111, Section 
223. 
● General Law - Part I, Title XVI, Chapter 111, Section 223. 
● State of Massachusetts, Chapter 96 of the Acts of 2012 
(amendment to 2010 law), Acts of 2012 Chapter 96 - 
Session Laws. 
● Massachusetts Department of Public Health (2010), 
Nutrition Standards for Competitive Foods and Beverages 
in Public Schools,105 CMR 225.000 
● Massachusetts Department of Public Health (2012). 
“Students, Healthy Schools: Revised Guidance for 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 8 of 10 
 
Implementing the Massachusetts School Nutrition 
Standards for Competitive Foods and Beverages” Healthy 
Students, Healthy Schools: Revised GuIdance for 
Implementing the Massachusetts School Nutrition 
Standards for Competitive Foods and Beverages  
Only Food Services is permitted to sell to students.  
The Food and Nutrition Services Department is solely responsible 
for food and beverages sold to children during the school day; 
consequently, the sale of food and beverages by others is 
expressly forbidden.  
All income must accrue to Food Services.  
The income for the total food and beverage service regularly 
maintained on school premises shall accrue to the school food 
services program to be used solely for the operation or 
improvement of such service. This shall include the income from 
the sale of a la carte foods and beverages and vending machines, 
managed by the Food and Nutrition Services Department. Food 
sales operated for profit (this includes bake and candy sales) shall 
not operate during the regular school day. 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 9 of 10 
 
Food items allowed for sale:  
The sale of a la carte foods shall be restricted to those items 
recognized as contributing to or permitted to be served as part of 
the breakfast or lunch. This restriction automatically eliminates 
the sale of candy, carbonated beverages, etc. Fundraising 
activities can only operate after school hours. 
Vending machines:  
603 CMR 29.01 Non-Profit Lunch Program/Use of Vending 
Machines: Vending machines are not to be in use during school 
hours.  
Canteen services at school site locations: 
603 CMR 29.05 Competitive Foods: 
Federal regulations prevent the sale of candy, gum, and 
carbonated beverages to students on school premises from the 
beginning of the school day to the end of the last lunch period.  
The sale of food items from canteen trucks, school stores or other 
areas that compete with school meals, time, and money is in 
violation of federal regulations. These sales further divert income 
essential to the financial wellbeing of the Food and Nutrition 
Services program.  
► Use of canteen services on school premises by students 
should be prohibited. 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-04 
Page 10 of 10 
 
CATERING SPECIAL FUNCTIONS AND FIELD TRIPS 
Special function considerations: 
● Schools planning special activities should contact the 
cafeteria manager/satellite attendant AND Office of Food 
and Nutrition Services with advance notice of the event. A 
written request for use of the cafeteria facility or hiring of 
personnel must be made in writing at least 7 days before 
the event.  
● Food and supplies or cooking utensils will not be 
provided free of charge. Schools requesting such services 
will be charged a fee to cover costs.  
● All evening and weekend functions will require hiring 
Food Services staff at an overtime rate. All costs must be 
paid prior to the date of the event. Credit will be given if 
the event is canceled with 48 hours’ notice. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Deputy Director 
Department: 
Food and Nutrition Services 
Mailing Address: 
370 Columbia Road, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9158 
Fax: 
617-635-9304 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


