Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-15 
Version 01 
 
STUDENT SURVEYS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
A federal statute, the Protection of Pupil Rights Amendment 
(PPRA), 20 U.S.C. §1232h, affords some protections for students 
and their parents before certain student surveys are conducted.  
Many student surveys, however, will not come within the scope of 
this statute. Please assess each student survey carefully before 
administering it to determine if this policy applies. A student 
survey that is anonymous or voluntary need not comply with the 
following policy. Additionally, a student survey that is not 
developed or administered through the use of funds received 
from the United States Department of Education also does not 
need to comply with this policy. 
For those student surveys that are developed or administered 
through the use of federal education funds and in which a 
student is required to participate, the following policy applies.  
This policy applies to those surveys that ask a student to reveal 
any of the following information:  political affiliation; mental 
illness or psychological problems; sexual behavior and/or 
attitudes; illegal, self-incriminating, and demeaning behavior; 
critical appraisals of close family members; relationships to which 
a privilege is recognized, such as clergy, medical doctors, or 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-15, 2023-2024 
September 1, 2023 
Page 2 of 2 
 
attorneys; religious affiliations or beliefs; and income, other than 
for eligibility for participation in a program.  Prior to 
administering such a survey, the student’s parent or guardian 
must consent, in writing, to the student’s participation in the 
survey.  Also, a copy of the survey must be made available to the 
parent or guardian.  Any such survey should also be brought to 
the attention of the Office of Legal Advisor. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


