Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-03 
Version 01 
 
 
PUBLIC RECORDS REQUESTS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
School Department staff members frequently receive requests 
from individuals and agencies, asking for information or 
documents and cite the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) or the 
Massachusetts Public Records Law as the authority for honoring 
their requests. 
The Massachusetts Public Records Law, M.G.L. c. 66 §10, provides 
that any person has a right to access public records.  This right of 
access includes the right to inspect, copy or have copies of 
records provided upon payment of a reasonable fee.  The 
Massachusetts General Laws broadly define "public records" as 
any books, papers, maps, photographs, electronic storage media, 
computer files, digitally stored material, or any other information 
regardless of form, which is made or received by employees of 
public agencies unless the material falls into one of several 
recognized exemptions.  Requests for public record information 
must be in writing; therefore, you should require that any oral 
requests for public record information be placed in writing by the 
requestor prior to responding to such a request.  Such writing 
must be signed, dated, and contain the address of the requestor.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-03 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
RECORDS REQUEST 
All written public records requests must be sent to the Office of 
Legal Advisor or filed through the City of Boston’s public records 
request portal. You can access the public records request portal 
by visiting https://www.boston.gov/departments/public-records 
or clicking the “Public Records Request” link at the bottom of 
every page of the boston.gov website. To ensure a prompt 
response, use of the City’s public records request portal is the 
preferred method for all requests. The Office of Legal Advisor will 
review each request to see if it falls within an exception to the 
public records law and will coordinate with your office or school 
for the search, retrieval, and copying of such information. The law 
provides that Boston Public Schools must respond to a request 
for public records within ten (10) days of our receipt of such a 
request.  It is imperative, therefore, that once you receive a public 
records request, it is faxed or delivered to the Office of Legal 
Advisor.  It is also imperative that, if you receive a request from 
the Office of Legal Advisor to compile public records, you do so 
expeditiously or call the Office of Legal Advisor if you cannot 
comply in a timely manner with its request for information.   
SUBPOENA 
When receiving a subpoena for student records, personnel 
records, medical records, or any other document, a copy of the 
subpoena must be emailed or delivered immediately to the 
Office of Legal Advisor for review.  After that, please forward all 
responsive records with the original subpoena to the Office of 
Legal Advisor.  Such a subpoena should be emailed or delivered 
even if it is addressed to an individual, rather than the “keeper of 
the records.”  Witness subpoenas (i.e., a subpoena that seeks 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-03 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
testimony rather than documents) should also be emailed or 
delivered to the Office of Legal Advisor for appropriate 
consultation.  Please email legal@bostonpublicschools.org. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


