Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-22 
Version 01 
 
SEXUAL OFFENDER REGISTRY INFORMATION (S.O.R.I.) 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
The Sexual Offender Registry Law requires that all convicted 
sexual offenders in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts register 
with the police departments in the cities or towns where they live 
and work. The State classifies the offender on a level of 1 to 3, 
depending on the likelihood of whether the offender might 
repeat his/her crimes. Once a local police department receives 
the information, it can be shared with public school districts for 
the protection of children. As a result of this law, Boston Public 
Schools principals and heads of school can access SORI 
information per the state website as described below.  
The Boston Public Schools will receive the Sexual Offender 
Registry Information (S.O.R.I.) from the Boston Police 
Department. Pursuant to state regulations, BPD must notify all 
schools in the community of a finally classified Level 3 sex 
offender or a sexually dangerous predator. Information available 
includes: the registered individual’s name, home and/or 
workplace address, date of birth, general physical description, 
charges for which they were convicted, and a photograph, if 
available.  
Information pertaining to the Sex Offender Registry website 
should be shared with your staff to educate them on this 
resource and of the public availability of S.O.R.I information. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-22 
Page 2 of 6 
 
Although S.O.R.I. information is distributed to alert communities 
and protect children, it must be handled in a responsible manner. 
It is against the law to distribute copies and/or use this 
information in an unlawful manner, e.g., threats, extortion, etc. It 
is also against the law to use the sex offender registry 
information to commit a crime or to engage in illegal 
discrimination or harassment of a sex offender.  
The law was passed to prevent convicted offenders from preying 
on innocent children. If you identify a registered offender acting 
inappropriately around a school building or approaching 
children, contact the Boston Police Department immediately.  
Attached, please find some common questions and answers.   
1. Who must register as a sex offender?  
A sex offender is anyone who lives, works, or attends school 
in Massachusetts who has:  
• Been convicted of a sex offense  
• Been adjudicated as a youthful offender or a delinquent 
juvenile for a sex offense  
• Been released from incarceration, parole, probation 
supervision, or custody with the Department of Youth 
Services for a sex offense conviction or adjudication  
• Been adjudicated as a sexually dangerous person, or a 
person released from civil commitment anytime from 
August 1, 1981 
2. How can a principal or head of school request information 
from the Sex Offender Registry Board?  
Once a person registers with the Sex Offender Registry 
Board and that information is shared with local police 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-22 
Page 3 of 6 
 
departments, those departments can share the information 
with public school districts. Local police departments have 
access to information pertaining to Levels 1, 2, and 3 sex 
offenders.  
3. How can non-school personnel or parents request 
information from the Sex Offender Registry Board?  
The public may request information about sex offenders in 
the community by sending a Sex Offender Inquiry Form 
request to the Sex Offender Registry Board. Requests may 
either be submitted online or at the following mail address:  
Attn: SORI Coordinator 
Sex Offender Registry Board 
P.O. Box 392 
North Billerica, MA 01862 
 
Please see https://www.mass.gov/how-to/request-sex-
offender-registry-information-sori for more information. 
A person may also request information in person at a local 
police station.  
Unlike local police departments, members of the public can 
only access information about Level 2 and Level 3 offenders. 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-22 
Page 4 of 6 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
OR 
Owner: 
Chief of Safety Services 
Department: 
Safety Services 
Mailing Address: 
213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, MA  02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000 
Fax: 
617-635-8006 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-22 
Page 5 of 6 
 
SEX OFFENDER REGISTRY INFORMATION (S.O.R.I) 
Questions and Answers 
• What should I as a principal/head of school do with the 
information I receive from Safety Services or BPD on S.O.R.I. 
cases? 
You should establish a secure, central file for mandatory review 
by all staff members, including teachers, paraprofessionals and 
volunteers who have an established pattern of work in the 
school. This file will be a one-copy file, with opportunity for 
staff to come and review. No copies of this S.O.R.I. information 
can be made and/or distributed. 
• What if upon first review, I note that one of the offenders is an 
employee/volunteer at my school? 
Contact the Office of Human Capital for further direction. The 
Office of Human Capital will review each situation on a case-
by-case basis and will work with the Office of Legal Advisor 
and the superintendent of schools on a final resolution. 
• What if upon first review, I note that one of the offenders is a 
student in my school? 
Contact Safety Services Unit at 617-635-8000 for further 
direction. 
• What should I do if a parent or community member comes to 
the school or calls seeking S.O.R.I. information? 
The individual should be directed to the nearest police district, 
which will provide the information upon request. 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-22 
Page 6 of 6 
 
• How will S.O.R.I. be handled relative to BPS employees, BPS 
students, BPS volunteers, and bus drivers? 
o All employees hired henceforth will have a S.O.R.I. check 
done automatically. This will be in conjunction with the 
C.O.R.I. (Criminal Offender Registry Information) check that 
is already in place. Also, all information regarding S.O.R.I. 
offenders received by Safety Services will be run against the 
current employee listing to identify any employees who 
might be sex offenders. 
o All information regarding S.O.R.I. offenders received by 
Safety Services will be run against the current student 
listing to identify any students who might be sex offenders. 
o Partners in Education will request to be placed on the 
Police Department’s mailing list on all S.O.R.I. cases and will 
check this on a regular basis against their listing of 
volunteers. 
o BPS’s contracted transportation provider will request to be 
placed on the Police Department’s mailing list on all S.O.R.I. 
cases and will check this on a regular basis against their 
listing of bus drivers. 
o Community Schools will request to be placed on the Police 
Department’s mailing list on all S.O.R.I. cases and will check 
this on a regular basis against their listing of employees. 
• What if any situation, in general, occurs in or around my 
school relative to the S.O.R.I. process? 
Contact Safety Services Unit immediately at 617-635-8000. 


