Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-10 
Version 01 
 
MILITARY RECRUITERS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
The purpose of this circular is to provide clarification on the law 
requiring the release of student information and access to 
students at the high school level by military recruiters. 
Federal legislation requires that a local educational agency (LEA) 
which receives federal funds release the names, addresses, and 
telephone listings of secondary students (grade 9 and above) to 
military recruiters and institutions of higher education.  The Every 
Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) contains similar language 
concerning this obligation. 
The release of student names, addresses, and telephone listings 
to military recruiters and institutions of higher education requires 
that LEAs provide parents and guardians with prior notification.  
Such notification is provided by the Boston Public Schools in the 
Guide to the Boston Public Schools for Students and Families 
(“Policy Handbook”).  As noted, a parent/guardian may request 
that this information not be released without giving the 
parent/guardian prior notification.  Accordingly, copies of all such 
requests by parents/guardians should be in writing and should 
be on file in the school’s office.  A copy of these signed requests 
or a master list of these student names and student numbers 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-10 
Page 2 of 3 
 
must be forwarded by October 15 by the head of school to the 
Office of Data & Accountability. 
If military recruiters contact a high school requesting a master 
list of student names and addresses, the recruiter should be 
asked to make the request directly to the Office of Data & 
Accountability. 
A second provision of the law authorizes direct access to high 
school students by military recruiters. Usually, this access is in the 
form of a request to make space available in the school for a 
military recruiter to distribute literature and to speak with or 
address interested students. The act requires that recruiters be 
given the same access to your students as you provide generally 
to post-secondary educational institutions or to prospective 
employers. Please review your practices to assure that 
henceforth all three (i.e., business, higher education, and military 
recruiters) have the same access. 
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
By October 15 
Heads of school forward to the Office of Data & 
Accountability the list of students whose 
names should not be given to military 
recruiters.  
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-10 
Page 3 of 3 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


