Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-14 
Version 01 
 
GATHERINGS ON SCHOOL GROUNDS AND 
DISTRIBUTION OF MATERIALS IN SCHOOLS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
It is permissible for schools to regulate the time, place, and 
manner of any demonstration to avoid disruption of classes or 
the orderly entrance and departure of students into and out of 
the building.  Accordingly, principals and heads of school are 
advised that gatherings of three (3) or more people or 
distribution of leaflets shall be regulated as follows: 
1. All gatherings or demonstrations should be viewed as a 
legal expression of First Amendment rights.  If a building 
administrator questions whether the material being 
distributed is protected by First Amendment rights, the 
Office of the Legal Advisor should be contacted immediately 
at 617-635-9320. 
2. All gatherings or demonstrations shall not disrupt school 
classes or the orderly entrance and departure of students 
into and out of the school building. 
3. The Students’ Freedom of Expression Law (G.L. c.  71, §82) 
permits students to plan peaceable assemblies on school 
property for the purpose of expressing their opinions.  
Building administrators may designate the time and place 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-14 
Page 2 of 4 
 
for such demonstrations to avoid disruption of classes and 
disorder in the school. 
4. All other gatherings or demonstrations which are not 
planned by students shall be restricted to areas off school 
property and in such areas as not to restrict the flow of 
traffic and school buses.  The building administrator may 
designate such areas.   
5. All gatherings or demonstrations shall be reported to the 
Boston Police Department (at 911), the operational leader, 
and the Department of Safety Services as soon as possible 
after the gathering and/or demonstration is organized.   
6. Gatherings in school buildings may be limited if school is 
being conducted remotely.  Any in-person gatherings or 
demonstrations will comply with public health guidelines 
including those that mandate group size limits, physical 
distancing, and the wearing of masks, as well as BPS policies 
regarding access to buildings.  
7. Materials and/or announcements of a public interest nature 
must be submitted to the administrator in charge two 
school days (at least 48 hours) prior to distribution for review 
and approval in order to be distributed in a school or a 
school-sponsored forum.  In addition, there should be no 
cost accrued by the BPS in the distribution of 
materials/announcements requested by external 
organizations.  The following materials shall be prohibited 
from circulation in schools or school-sponsored forums: 
• Advertisements of for-profit and political organizations 
and/or events sponsored by said organizations (including 
political and commercial flyers) 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-14 
Page 3 of 4 
 
• Materials including those promoting anything illegal or 
immoral and/or are otherwise pervasively indecent or 
vulgar 
• Materials which include false and/or misleading 
information and/or which interfere with the proper and 
orderly operation and discipline of the school 
8. Requests for collections and donations, which do not have 
the authorization of the School Department, shall be 
prohibited.  
9. The sale of merchandise, products, etc. by a recognized 
school/parent organization may be authorized with the prior 
approval of a building administrator.  
10. The sale and/or promotion of merchandise, products, etc. by 
an external organization/agency will not be authorized 
unless the proceeds are used for the support of educational 
programs and prior approval has been given. 
11. The sale of lottery tickets and/or other games of chance 
shall be prohibited. 
12. Distribution process: 
• Outside groups’ literature should not be distributed to 
students during instructional time and, if possible, should 
not be intermingled with official school notices, but may 
be posted on a bulletin board used for such materials. 
• Students should not be compelled to take home or read 
any outside group’s literature. 
• School newsletters and notices to parents may not recruit 
members for outside groups. 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-14 
Page 4 of 4 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


