Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-04 
Version 01 
 
SCHOOL VISITOR GUIDELINES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
It is School Committee policy to welcome all parents and other 
visitors to our schools and to encourage their active support of 
and involvement in the schools. However, considering the 
challenges of COVID-19 and to comply with current CDC, DESE, 
and district guidelines, we are asking all members of our school 
communities to support our effort to limit traffic in our buildings 
to only assigned students, BPS staff, BPS facilities contractors, 
and approved partners as described below until further notice. 
Please see Superintendent Circular SAF-12 School Access 
Control. 
All permitted visitors, including School Department personnel, 
are expected to report to the school main office before going 
elsewhere in the building. They will be required to sign in, noting 
their name, affiliation, and reason for the visit; and before leaving, 
to sign out of the building. Visitors will be required to park in 
certain designated spaces or at certain designated times in 
school parking lots. All visitors should be informed of these 
procedures through such means as is determined by the school. 
Occasionally, visitors may disrupt school activities: by behaving 
inappropriately; by harassing staff; by shouting; or by insisting on 
visiting at inappropriate times. Every effort should be made to 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 2 of 13 
 
 
work with such visitors to inform them of established procedures 
in an effort to eliminate future disruptions. When such 
disruptions occur, however, the building administrator may issue 
the offender a Trespass Warning pursuant to M.G.L. c. 266, § 120. 
Attachment A provides an example of such a letter, with 
appropriate fields to be filled in by the building administrator. 
Such a warning requires the offending party to contact the 
building administrator, or a designee, prior to appearing at school 
for any school-related matter. Additionally, depending upon the 
nature of the inappropriate behavior, a building administrator 
may choose to substitute any of the following restrictions in the 
third paragraph of Attachment A: 
1. The visitor will be required to telephone prior to visiting the 
building to inform the building administrator of their intent 
in visiting the building. 
2. The visitor will be required to be accompanied by the 
building administrator or their designee to classrooms. 
3. Advance scheduling of consultations with teachers or other 
providers will be required. 
4. Parents delivering student[s] to school may be required to 
leave the student[s] at the front door and not be permitted 
to accompany them to the classroom. 
This warning should expire at the end of the academic year. As is 
noted on the Trespass Warning, it is appealable through the 
operational leader. 
Additionally, by issuing the Trespass Warning, the building 
administrator is placing the disruptive visitor on notice that any 
further inappropriate behavior will result in the issuance of a 
Trespass Notice. If inappropriate behaviors continue, Attachment 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 3 of 13 
 
 
B provides an example of such a trespass notice, again with fields 
to be completed by the building administrator. No Trespass 
Notice shall issue, however, without the approval of the 
superintendent or designee, which may be sought through the 
operational leader, who will contact the Superintendent’s Office. 
The Trespass Notice will be effective for one year from the date it 
was issued and may, in the reasonable exercise of the building 
administrator’s discretion and with the approval of the 
superintendent or designee, be renewed thereafter. Failure to 
comply with any restriction imposed by the Trespass Notice may 
result in the visitor’s arrest and prosecution for criminal trespass. 
Like the Trespass Warning, it is appealable at the visitor’s election 
through the operational leader. 
In instances of extreme behavior, such as assault or battery of an 
administrator, faculty member, staff member, or student, a 
building administrator with approval of the superintendent or 
designee may issue a Trespass Notice without prior issuance of a 
Trespass Warning. Attachment C is an example of such a notice. 
Such a Trespass Notice as is contained in Attachment C should 
be reserved, however, for particularly egregious behavior where 
there is a particularized apprehension for the safety or well-being 
for a member or members of the school community. Once issued, 
or until such time it is vacated, the named visitor is prohibited, 
under penalty of law, from entering or using school grounds for 
any reason. This Trespass Notice is effective immediately, and its 
duration is indefinite. A copy of this notice must be provided to 
the Boston Police Department, the Safety Office, and the Office of 
Legal Advisor, and maintained in the school’s file. A visitor’s 
failure to comply with this notice will result in immediate arrest 
and prosecution for trespassing if it is violated. This notice is 
likewise appealable through the operational leader. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 4 of 13 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Office of Legal Advisor Director 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 5 of 13 
 
 
ATTACHMENT A 
Re:  TRESPASS WARNING PURSUANT TO G. L. c. 266 § 120 
Warning notice of unacceptable conduct that incited a physical 
confrontation 
 
Dear [Visitor name]: 
By this letter I am issuing a Trespass Warning pursuant to G. L. c. 
266, § 120. As a result of [description of incident] on [date], it is 
necessary for [school name] to issue this warning to ensure the 
safety of students, school staff, and the immediate community. 
To foster and ensure effective teaching and learning, it is 
necessary to maintain an environment that is positive and free of 
disruption, so that the business of the school may be 
appropriately completed. It has been determined that your 
presence on [date] seriously disturbed the mental health of 
numerous students here at [school name]. Such conduct cannot 
be tolerated and does not reflect the type of behaviors we model 
for our students. 
We ask that you make every effort to avoid coming in or around 
the area of [school name] at the arrival or dismissal of school. Any 
further incident[s] that disrupts the mental health of other 
students by inciting a physical confrontation during the 
remainder of this academic year may next result in the issuance 
of a formal Trespass Notice under G. L. c. 266, § 120. Failure to 
comply with such a Trespass Notice would subject you to 
immediate arrest and prosecution for violation of such a trespass 
notice. 
This action is being taken on behalf of and in the best interest of 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 6 of 13 
 
 
our students, staff, and community. Please contact the school at 
[school phone number] if you wish to discuss this warning notice 
or seek other assistance. You may also contact the Operational 
Leader at [phone number] to discuss the issuance of this 
Trespass Warning, including if you dispute the reasons for its 
issuance. 
Thank you for your cooperation in this matter. 
Sincerely, 
 
[Principal or other responsibility official name]  
[Title and school]  
 
cc:  Boston Police Department 
Superintendent 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Safety Services 
School Files 
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 7 of 13 
 
 
ATTACHMENT B  
Re:  TRESPASS NOTICE PURSUANT TO G. L. c. 266, §120,  
Requiring that you not enter or use the [school name] property  
 
Dear [Visitor name]: 
As a result of [description of the incident of unacceptable 
behavior that prompted a previous warning and the current 
notice] at the [school name] on [date of original incident], it is 
necessary for me to issue this Trespass Notice pursuant to M.G.L. 
c. 266, § 120. Therefore, from the date of this notice and until such 
time as it is either vacated or for one calendar year whichever is 
first you are not allowed to be present on the premises of the 
[school name].  
Despite the warning issued on [date], a copy of which is enclosed, 
your behavior continues to disrupt the teaching and learning 
process and indeed places our students, staff, and faculty at risk 
of harm.  
I determined that your behavior on [dates of each incident for 
which a warning notice was issued and the current incident 
which prompts this Trespass Notice and describe behavior] 
seriously disturbed the school environment and the conduct of 
school activities and related school business. This cannot be 
tolerated and is contrary to the mission of the [school name]. If in 
the future you need to address particular school-related matters, 
please contact either my designee or me by telephone so that 
your concern may be addressed.  
By this letter, I am formally notifying you of the Trespass Notice. A 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 8 of 13 
 
 
copy of this notice will be provided to the Boston Police 
Department, the Department of Safety Services, Office of Legal 
Advisor, the [school name’s] file, and will be sent to you by 
regular and certified mail. This trespass notice prohibits you, 
under penalty of law, from entering or using the [school name] or 
from setting foot on school property for any reason. Failure to 
comply with this Trespass Notice shall subject you to immediate 
arrest and prosecution for violation of this Trespass Notice. This 
notice will be effective for one year from the date it was issued 
and may, in the reasonable exercise of my discretion, be renewed 
thereafter. If renewed, I will notify you in writing prior to its 
renewal. If not renewed, its effect will end one year after its 
issuance.  
I look forward to working with you in a cooperative manner. 
Please contact me at [contact telephone and email] if you wish 
to discuss this Trespass Notice or seek other assistance. You may 
also contact the operational leader [number of contact person] 
to discuss the issuance of this Trespass Notice. You may also 
contact the operational leader if you dispute the reasons for 
issuing this notice, or if, during the duration of this notice, you 
wish to seek to vacate or modify its provisions.  
This notice is likewise appealable through the operational leader.  
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 9 of 13 
 
 
Thank you for your cooperation in this matter.  
Sincerely,  
[Principal or other responsibility official name]  
[Title and school]  
 
cc:  Boston Police Department  
Superintendent  
Office of Legal Advisor  
Safety Services  
School Files 
 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 10 of 13 
 
 
ATTACHMENT C  
 
Re:  TRESPASS NOTICE, PURSUANT to G. L. c. 266, § 120,  
Requiring that you not enter or use the [school name] property  
 
Dear [Visitor name]:  
As a result of [insert detailed description of the incident of 
unacceptable behavior] at the [school name] on [date of 
incident], it is necessary for me to issue this Trespass Notice, 
pursuant to G.L. c. 266, § 120. Therefore, from the date of this 
notice, you are not allowed to be present on the premises of the 
[name of school].  
I have determined that your behavior on [date of incident] placed 
our students, staff, and faculty at risk of harm. Furthermore, your 
actions seriously disturbed both the school environment and the 
conduct of school activities and school-related business. This 
cannot be tolerated. It is contrary to the mission of the [name of 
school]. If in the future you have a need to address particular 
school-related matters, please contact either my designee or me 
by telephone so that your concerns can be addressed.  
This letter serves to formally notify you of the Trespass Notice. A 
copy of this notice has been provided to the Boston Police 
Department, the Superintendent’s Office, the Office of Legal 
Advisor, the Office of Safety Services, the [name of school]’s file, 
and to you by regular and certified mail. This Trespass Notice 
prohibits you, under penalty of law, from entering or using the 
[name of school] or from setting foot on school property for any 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 11 of 13 
 
 
reason. Failure to comply with this trespass notice shall subject 
you to immediate arrest and prosecution for violation of this 
Trespass Notice. This notice will be effective immediately, and its 
duration is indefinite.  
I look forward to working with you in a cooperative manner. 
Please contact me by telephone if you wish to discuss this 
Trespass Notice or seek other assistance. You may also contact 
the operational leader at [number of contact person] to discuss 
the issuance of this Trespass Notice, including if you dispute the 
reasons therefore.  
Thank you for your cooperation in this matter.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
[Principal or other responsibility official name]  
[Title and school]  
cc:  Boston Police Department  
Superintendent  
Office of Legal Advisor  
Safety Services  
School Files  
Enclosure [attach copy of incident report if available] 
 
Guidelines for Visiting the Boston Public Schools 
1. Until further notice, parents/guardians and staff from 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 12 of 13 
 
 
partner agencies [except for BPS facilities service 
contractors and approved partner agencies, as described 
above] will not be allowed in school buildings. 
Parents/guardians are asked to drop off and pick up their 
students on the exterior of the school building in the area[s] 
designated by the school leader/staff. 
2. ALL visitors MUST report to the school’s main office and sign 
in before going elsewhere in the building, and they must 
sign out before leaving. Some schools have a desk near the 
main entrance where visitors may sign in and out. However, 
if no one is sitting at the desk, the visitor must go to the 
main office. 
3. All visitors will receive a Visitor’s Pass when they sign in. 
They must return it to the office or sign-in desk when they 
leave. Please be sure your Visitor’s Pass is visible while you 
are in the school or schoolyard. Visitor’s passes will not be 
required at Open Houses, Parent Nights or other school-
sponsored events open to the public to the extent those 
events are held. 
4. For the safety of our students and staff, we will consider that 
visitors who do not sign in and cannot show a Visitor’s Pass 
are trespassing. A school staff member may ask them to 
leave the building and schoolyard. 
5. Visitors who want to meet with a teacher or administrator 
should contact the school via phone or email to schedule 
any discussion or virtual appointments that they would like 
to have.  
6. Teachers or staff who are expecting a visitor should notify 
the office they are expecting a visitor and provide name and 
reason prior to the visitor’s arrival. In some cases, a staff 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-04 
Page 13 of 13 
 
 
member may escort the visitor to the meeting place. 
7. If a student is sick/injured and needs to be picked up, school 
staff will contact the parent/guardian to make 
arrangements and escort the student to meet the 
authorized adult. 
8. It is very disruptive to the classroom for parents to pick up 
their children before the regular dismissal time. If this is 
necessary, the parent should call the school office in 
advance and pick their child up in the location designated 
by the school. Parents may not go directly to the classroom 
to pick up their child. The school will not release a student to 
anyone other than a custodial parent without the parent’s 
consent and proper identification. 
9. Occasionally, visitors may disrupt school activities by 
insisting on visiting classrooms unannounced, harassing 
staff, shouting, or using inappropriate language. If such 
disruptive behavior continues, the school administrator may 
restrict the individual’s visits or deny future access to the 
building, schoolyard, or virtual learning environment. 
10. Thank you for your cooperation in observing these 
guidelines. Be assured that our goal is to create a safe, 
secure, and positive learning experience for all our students 
and their families. 


