Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HWD-02 
Version 01 
 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
BACKGROUND 
Regular physical activity is one of the most important factors 
affecting health. It helps control weight, reduces the risk of 
developing cardiovascular disease and diabetes, improves mental 
health and mood, and increases longevity. Most Boston Public 
School (BPS) students are not physically active for the 60 minutes 
per day recommended by the Center for Disease Control. Only 16% 
of BPS high school students reported being physically active for 
the recommended time, and only 40% reported having weekly 
physical education, according to the 2015 Boston High School 
Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS). Twenty-three percent of 
middle school students reported being physically active for the 
recommended time and 80% reported having weekly physical 
education, according to the 2013 Boston Middle School YRBS. This 
lack of physical activity is contributing to an epidemic of 
overweight and obesity in BPS students. Measurement of 
students’ Body Mass Index in 1st, 4th, 7th and 10th grades revealed 
that 39% of BPS students are at an unhealthy weight (2015). 
  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 2 of 18 
 
Recent national, cumulative evidence shows clear links between 
school-based physical activity, including physical education, and 
academic success. Most of the studies report that physical activity 
was positively related to academic performance, including 
academic achievement (grades, standardized test scores); 
academic behavior (on-task behavior, attendance); and factors 
that can positively influence academic achievement 
(concentration, attention, improved classroom behavior). Most 
importantly, adding time during the school day for physical 
activity does not appear to take away from academic 
performance. Given these findings, the BPS recommends that 
schools increase the amount of time spent in physical education 
and/or increase the quality of their physical education program, 
provide recess and physical activity breaks in the classroom, 
promote walk/ bike to school programs, and offer non-competitive 
intramural and interscholastic sports. 
To improve health and academic outcomes, BPS is implementing 
strategies to increase the frequency and quality of physical 
education (PE) and physical activity (PA) for BPS students. A PE & 
PA Task Force was formed in November 2010 to align the district’s 
PE-related policies and bring the district into compliance with MA 
General Laws Chapter 71, Section 3 that states: 
“Physical education shall be taught as a required subject in all 
grades for all students in the public schools for the purpose of 
promoting the physical well-being of students.” 
With input from BPS principals, physical education teachers, BPS 
Wellness Council members, BPS department heads, Academic 
Superintendents, Labor Relations, and other district-leaders, the 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 3 of 18 
 
PE & PA Taskforce created the PE & PA Policy to align the former 
BPS policies. 
 
DEFINITIONS 
Comprehensive School Physical Activity Program (CSPAP): An 
approach by which school districts and schools utilize all 
opportunities for school-based physical activity to develop 
physically educated students who participate in physical activity 
each day and develop the knowledge, skills, and confidence to be 
physically active for a lifetime. Quality physical education is the 
cornerstone of a CSPAP.  CSPAP also includes school-based 
physical activity opportunities; school employee wellness and 
involvement; and family and community involvement. 
Physical Education (PE) is a planned, sequential program of 
curricula and instruction that helps students develop the 
knowledge, attitudes, motor skills, self-management skills and 
confidence needed to adopt and maintain physically active 
lifestyles. PE curricula must align with the BPS PE Frameworks. PE 
is comprehensive and includes student learning competencies 
that cross all four strands of the BPS PE Frameworks 1) Movement 
2) Health-Related Fitness 3) Personal and Social 4) Lifelong 
Physical Activity. PE activities that focus on a single activity, such 
as swimming and dance, count as PE only if it is part of a CSPAP 
and align with the BPS PE Frameworks. 
Physical Activity (PA) is a behavior consisting of bodily movement 
that requires energy expenditure above the normal physiological 
(muscular, cardiorespiratory) requirements of a typical school day. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 4 of 18 
 
Recess, movement breaks, promotional activities, and cross-
curricular incorporation are some examples of PA that should NOT 
be counted as PE; PA is not PE and it cannot be allocated as PE. 
Moderate-to-Vigorous Physical Activity (MVPA) is measured by an 
increase in heart rate, breathing, and body temperature.  
Moderate physical activity refers to activities equivalent in 
intensity to brisk walking or bicycling. Vigorous physical activity 
produces large increases in breathing or heart rate, such as 
jogging, aerobic dance or bicycling uphill. 
  
PHYSICAL EDUCATION & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY POLICY 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to a District-wide, 
strategic effort to increase all students’ physical activity and fitness 
by bringing more physical education and physical activity to 
schools; improving the quality of physical education and recess; 
and increasing the equity of physical activity programs and 
resources across our schools. Activities will be inclusive to meet 
the needs, interests, abilities and cultural diversity of all students, 
including students of all gender identities, students with 
disabilities, and students with special healthcare needs. 
Numerous studies indicate that regularly engaging in moderate-
to-vigorous exercise contributes to overall physical and mental 
health and that nurturing an exercise habit among children lays 
the foundation for lifelong fitness. Research also shows that 
increased physical activity increases children’s cognitive function, 
ability to concentrate in class, and academic performance.  Thus, 
as a part of a strategic effort to improve academic performance, 
BPS recognizes and promotes the benefits of a Comprehensive 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 5 of 18 
 
Physical Activity Program, where quality physical education is the 
cornerstone and additional physical activity is integrated 
throughout the school day and into before and after school 
programs, staff wellness and family engagement activities. 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to a strong athletics 
program that offers a variety of programs and is accessible to all 
students. Athletics participation can contribute to student fitness, 
wellness, character development and a lifelong commitment to a 
physically active lifestyle. Additionally, by establishing a safe, 
supportive and engaging school environment, athletic programs 
encourage school connectedness and create a climate where 
healthy competition and support fill the school with spirit and a 
sense of community. Research shows that healthy children are 
better learners and connected students are more likely to stay in 
school. In this way, athletics contributes to the academic success 
of students. 
In accordance with state law, all schools must provide all students 
in all grades with opportunities for physical activity. Schools must 
offer at least 150 minutes of in-school physical activity weekly in 
grades PreK-8, including required physical education, movement 
breaks, recess, or lessons involving movement structured to 
support moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA).  In grades 
PreK-8, students are expected to have at least 20 minutes of daily 
recess.  
Teachers and other school and community personnel shall not use 
physical activity (e.g., running laps, pushups) as punishment nor 
withhold opportunities for physical activity during the school day 
(including but not limited to recess, classroom physical activity 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 6 of 18 
 
breaks, or physical education) as punishment for any reason other 
than illness or safety or as approved by the school leader. This 
includes denying a student physical activity time in order to make 
up work unless under unusual circumstances. The district will 
provide teachers and other school staff with a list of ideas for 
alternative ways to discipline students. 
All schools must offer standards-based physical education (PE) for 
all students in all grades.  Schools are required to offer at least 45 
minutes of weekly PE in grades PreK-8 and at least one semester 
(equivalent of a half school year) of PE each year in grades 9-12.  
We recommend that schools provide at least 80 minutes of 
weekly PE in grades PreK-8.  In order to help schools work toward 
this recommendation, Boston Public Schools will develop an 
implementation plan with input from current principals and 
headmasters. This implementation plan will be shared with the 
School Committee. 
Teachers and other school and community personnel shall not use 
physical activity (e.g., running laps, pushups) as punishment; 
withhold opportunities for physical activity during the school day 
(including but not limited to recess, classroom physical activity 
breaks or physical education) as punishment for any reason; or 
deny a student physical activity time in order to make up work 
unless under unusual circumstances. 
Extended day programs and out of school time, which includes 
before and after school programs, are expected to offer an array of 
physical activity opportunities to ensure all students are able to 
participate. Schools shall offer opportunities for students to 
participate in physical activity before and after the school day, 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 7 of 18 
 
including extended day time, through a variety of methods 
including physical activity clubs, physical activity in before/after 
school programs, intramurals and interscholastic sports, and in 
their school commute.  
The District recognizes that students benefit from bicycle and 
pedestrian safety education to help make the trip to and from 
school safer and instill confidence in students, parents and 
community members. The District will develop and maintain 
policies and procedures for working together with city agencies, 
schools, families, and students in efforts to promote a safer and 
easier trip to and from school when students and staff are walking, 
bicycling, using public transit or other means of physically active 
transport. The District will encourage 7-12th grade students to use 
public transportation when available and appropriate for travel to 
school, and will work with the local transit agency to provide 
transit passes for eligible 7-12th grade students. The District will 
provide resources to schools, students and families regarding 
walking, riding a bicycle, using public transit or other forms of 
active transportation.  The District will encourage wellness 
councils, school administrators and students, staff, families and 
community partners to assist the District in promoting safe, 
physically active travel to and from school. Schools are 
encouraged to designate a transportation liaison to facilitate 
communication regarding District efforts to promote safe, 
physically active travel to and from school. Schools shall 
participate in student transportation surveys when requested to 
help the District plan for strategies to promote a safer and easier 
trip to and from school when walking, bicycling, using public 
transit or other means of physically active transport. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 8 of 18 
 
IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES 
A. State law requires that all students in grade K-12 receive 
physical education. 
 
1.) The BPS PE Curriculum must meet the following criteria: 
a. The curriculum is standards-based and it aligns with BPS 
PE Curriculum Frameworks. 
b. The curriculum provides moderate-to-vigorous physical 
activity (MVPA) during at least 50% of PE class time. 
c. The PE scope and sequence for each grade level must 
include district-sponsored PE curriculum, such as SPARK 
in K-12th grades and Project Adventure in K-12th grades. 
  
2.) Student assessments in PE must include the following: 
a. Graded competency (i.e. knowledge, skills, practice) and 
participation (i.e. effort, proper attire, teamwork) 
assessments that are reflected on all students’ report 
cards. 
  
3.) BPS PE classes have the following requirements for scheduling: 
a. Reflected on all schools’ master schedules and on all 
students’ report cards. 
  


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 9 of 18 
 
4.) Staffing requirements include: 
a. BPS supports a learning environment in which all teachers 
are highly qualified in the subject areas they teach. 
Therefore, PE class must be taught by a teacher that holds 
an active and valid PE teaching license from the MA 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. 
b. If a school is unable to provide all students in all grades 
with PE instruction from licensed PE teachers, they should 
contact the Office of Health and Wellness for support with 
identifying district-approved staffing alternatives.  All PE 
staffing alternatives must be approved by HR, the Office of 
Health and Wellness, and the school’s respective 
instructional superintendent.  Staffing alternatives are only 
considered in extenuating circumstances or in situations 
that increase opportunities for students. 
  
5.).  School Wellness Councils are required to develop a school-
based Comprehensive School Physical Activity Plan (CSPAP) as a 
part of the Wellness Action Plan that includes: 
a. A school-based CSPAP Policy that documents the CSPAP 
Implementation Guidelines. 
b. The CSPAP Implementation Guidelines must outline how 
all students in grades K-8 are to receive at least 45 minutes 
of PE per week, and how all students in grades 9-12 receive 
at least 1 semester of PE per grade. 
c. The CSPAP Implementation Guidelines also include a plan 
that outlines how the school aims to provide 150 minutes 
of in-school physical activity in grades k-8, including 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 10 of 18 
 
required physical education, movement breaks, recess, or 
lessons involving movement.  In grades PreK-8, students 
are expected to have a minimum of 20 minutes of daily 
recess; this must be included in the CSPAP. 
d. School staff shall be provided resources to integrate 
physical activity into their academic lessons. Contact the 
Office of Health and Wellness for resources. 
e. School wellness councils will work with building principals 
and Facilities Management/ Planning to identify safe and 
appropriate indoor and outdoor space for group physical 
activity and physical education. The lack of identified 
single-use physical activity spaces (i.e., gymnasiums) will 
not hinder schools from offering an environment 
conducive to physical activity and implementation of a 
CSPAP plan. Examples include: 
○ Shared classroom space (mobile physical education 
classes conducted in classrooms) 
○ Schoolyard 
○ Creative use of hallway space or other shared spaces 
in buildings 
○ Repurposing classroom or other building spaces for 
physical activity 
○ Co-teaching with other content areas 
  
B.  Schools shall offer daily physical activity opportunities during 
the school day.  
To that end principals/heads of school can: 
a. Integrate daily physical activity into the classroom 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 11 of 18 
 
setting with kinesthetic learning, cross-curricular 
lessons, and team teaching 
b. Encourage short physical activity breaks between 
lessons or classes, as appropriate 
c. Encourage school-wide physical activity promotions like 
pedometer challenges, field day, dance-a-thon, walk-a-
thon, active transport, etc. 
d. Provide opportunities for daily recess with at least 20 
minutes a day of supervised recess, preferably outdoors, 
during which time staff encourage moderate to 
vigorous activity and provide appropriate space and 
equipment. In grades K-8, daily recess is required. 
e. Schedule recess before lunch so that students will come 
to lunch less distracted and ready to eat. 
  
C. Schools shall offer daily physical activity opportunities during 
extended day programs and out of school time which includes 
before and after school programs.  
To that end principals/headmasters can: 
a. Allow school spaces and facilities to be available for school-
sponsored activities that promote fitness for its students 
during extended and non-school hours, as circumstances 
permit. 
b. Remain in alignment with best practices and 
requirements for licensed school-age care programs 
partnering with schools (606 CMR 7).  Specifically 
○ Providing daily indoor and outdoor time periods, 
weather permitting, which include both small and 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 12 of 18 
 
large muscle activities;      
 
○ Each school shall dedicate at least 30-60 minutes of 
morning or afterschool program time to physical 
activity for all students; 
c. Partner with local government and community-based 
agencies to support active transport to school by 
reducing/eliminating hazards and increasing accessibility 
(i.e., bicycle parking). 
  
D. Safe Routes to School Boston 
The District will encourage students to be physically active before 
and after school by promoting walking/ biking/rolling to school 
through a comprehensive Safe Routes to School Boston program, 
including encouragement, education, evaluation, 
engineering/environment, enforcement, and equity strategies. 
Schools should include Safe Routes to School in their Annual 
Wellness Action Plans. 
  
a. Equity strategies: Consider the barriers and concerns, and 
opportunities that face families and ensure equitable 
opportunities in each strategy of this initiative. 
b. Encouragement strategies: 
○ Walking Promotions (e.g. Walk to School Days, 
Walking Challenges, School-wide Promotions) 
○ Establishing a school Park and Walk site 
○ Walking School Buses 
c. Education strategies: 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 13 of 18 
 
○ Implementing an active transportation safety 
curriculum in health or physical education. 
○ Developing and disseminating preferred Walking 
Route Maps that provide students and parents with 
the additional tools to travel safely to and from 
school. 
○ Disseminating walking tips and simple pedestrian 
safety information and promotional materials. 
d. Evaluation of Need strategies: 
○ Conduct a walk audit to identify concerns regarding 
the physical/environmental conditions that surround 
your school. 
○ Conduct a travel hand tally to understand the impact 
and number of students that will benefit. 
e. Engineering/Environment strategies: 
○ Alert proper authorities regarding environmental 
safety concerns.  Engineering or other environmental 
issues should be reported through BOS: 311, other 
pressing concerns should be reported to BPS 
Transportation. 
○ Increase accessibility and support for those choosing 
to ride by installing secure bicycle storage and 
designating facilities for storing other wheeled 
devices like scooters. 
f. Enforcement strategies: Share Preferred Walking Routes 
with local police stations for proper crossing guard 
assignment and heightened awareness on popular routes. 
  
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 14 of 18 
 
E. Community Partnerships 
Providing students and families with access to safe, affordable, 
and convenient places to be physically active is an important 
strategy for promoting health and reducing risk for obesity. 
Community partners are a vital, valuable aspect of quality physical 
activity programs and can meaningfully support PE and PA in 
BPS. School officials are encouraged to work with partners to 
develop a written joint use agreement that delineates the terms 
and conditions for joint use and the responsibilities of all parties. 
Community partners must follow the BPS Community Partner 
Policy. To that end, principals/heads of school can work with 
community partners to: 
a. Secure mini-grant funding 
b. Use of facilities on and off-campus 
c. Training/professional development 
d. Assist with program implementation 
e. Work with community partners to create additional 
opportunities that meet the unique needs of their school 
  
F. Physical Activity and Punishment 
Teachers and other school and community personnel shall not: 
a. Use physical activity (e.g., running laps, pushups) as 
punishment 
b. Withhold opportunities for physical activity during the 
school day (including but not limited to recess, 
classroom physical activity breaks or physical education) 
as punishment for any reason 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 15 of 18 
 
c. Deny a student physical activity time in order to make 
up work unless under unusual circumstances 
The district will provide teachers and other school staff with a list 
of ideas for alternative ways to discipline students. 
  
MONITORING, COMPLIANCE & SUPPORT 
  
1. Monitoring Curriculum 
a. Scope and Sequence: Each school must annually 
submit a PE scope and sequence for each grade level to 
the School Wellness Councils; the scope and sequences 
must align with BPS PE Curriculum Frameworks. The 
Office of Health and Wellness can support schools in 
aligning their PE scope and sequence with the BPS PE 
Curriculum Frameworks.  If necessary, the School 
Wellness Councils may be asked to submit the school’s 
PE scope and sequence. 
 
2. Monitoring Assessments 
a. Report Cards: All students’ report cards must include a 
grade for taking PE class. 
 
3. Monitoring school-based Comprehensive School Physical 
Activity Plan (CSPAP) 
a. Wellness Actions Plans:  School Wellness Councils’ 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 16 of 18 
 
CSPAP will include their school-based CSPAP Policy 
that outlines how all students in all grades will receive 
weekly physical activity. 
b. The Office of Health and Wellness will monitor School 
Wellness Councils’ CSPAP. 
c. The Office of Health and Wellness will monitor the 
community partner’s compliance with the BPS 
Community Partner Policy.. 
 
4. Monitoring Scheduling and Graduation Requirements 
a. Master Schedules:  All schools must reflect adequate PE 
on their master schedule. 
b. Student Report Cards: All students’ report cards must 
include PE to determine compliance with the PE & PA 
Policy and to determine students’ graduation eligibility. 
 
5. Monitoring Staffing: 
a. Staffing Reports: The Office of Human Capital will 
annually conduct PE staffing reports for each school.  
The PE staffing reports will be monitored to determine 
compliance with the PE Staffing Policy for BPS. 
 
6. The Office of Health and Wellness will support schools in 
their efforts by providing: 
a. Yearly professional development opportunities for both 
physical education teachers and school-based 
personnel 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 17 of 18 
 
b. Professional development opportunities for recess-
based personnel 
c. Schools shall be provided resources to integrate 
physical activity into their academic lessons 
d. Resources available for school staff include: 
○ Field-day guides 
○ Physical Activity Curriculum 
○ Physical Activity Breaks 
○ Recess temperature recommendations 
○ Active Recess materials 
○ Guide to Before and After School Activities 
○ A list of physical activity community partners and 
contact information 
7. Schools Non-Compliant with PE & PA Policy: 
The principal and relevant school superintendent will be notified 
by the Office of Health and Wellness if a school is found not to be 
compliant. The Office of Health and Wellness will work directly 
with the school to support the development of a CSPAP 
Improvement Plan that puts the school on track for compliance 
with the PE & PA Policy.  
School administration, teachers, families, students, community-
based organizations, and wellness councils will be provided 
information about the policy to engage and support 
implementation, monitoring, and compliance. The BPS Office of 
Health and Wellness will provide an implementation guide that 
will include strategies and support for professional development, 
curriculum, partnership development, instructional materials, 
school-based PA strategies, and other resources.  


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-02 
Page 18 of 18 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director of Health & Wellness 
Department: Health and Wellness 
Mailing 
Address: 
370 Columbia Road, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-6643 
Email: 
healthandwellness@bostonpublicschools.org   
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


