Page 1:
 
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
ACA-18 
Version 01 
 
ATTENDANCE AND PUNCTUALITY POLICIES AND 
PROCEDURES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version 
This circular reflects the School Committee’s approved policies 
and procedures for attendance and punctuality. It contains 
detailed guidelines on: 
● Policy background 
● Chronic absenteeism 
● Attendance policy 
● Covid-19 attendance protocols 
● Punctuality policy (tardiness) 
● Recording and maintaining student attendance 
● Recording and following up on DNRs (did not reports) 
● Discharge/withdrawal protocols 
● Notification to parents/caregivers of student absence 
● Notifying parents/caregivers of a missing child 
● Safety concerns related to attendance 
● Approving home & hospital tutoring 
● Procedures for referral to supervisors of attendance 
BACKGROUND AND GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
It is an essential priority of the Boston Public Schools to 
encourage students to maintain consistently high attendance 
rates throughout the school year. Students cannot take full 
advantage of academic and extracurricular opportunities unless 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 2 of 41 
 
 
they are in school consistently. All BPS schools and their School 
Site Councils are expected to implement comprehensive 
prevention and intervention strategies to improve student 
attendance each school year. 
The BPS student attendance policy was approved by the School 
Committee in 1998-1999. It was revised in May 2006 and June 
2007 to include the system-wide prohibition of using cutoff times 
to refuse students’ entry into buildings and the additional 
flexibility for schools to promote and ensure consistently high, 
on-time attendance. It was further revised in 2018 to include 
cultural and religious holidays as an eligible excused absence 
category. In 2021, it was revised to discontinue the policies of 
converting tardies to absences and issuing grades of “No Credit 
(NC)” based on attendance, as well as elevating the importance of 
focusing on chronic absenteeism, where all absences and missed 
instructional time are considered to have a detrimental impact 
on student outcomes.  
On December 10, 2015, the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) 
was signed into law, reauthorizing the federal Elementary and 
Secondary Education Act of 1965 (ESEA). The law includes 
provisions to help ensure improved outcomes for all students 
receiving elementary and secondary education, including the 
following: 
● States must establish high academic content standards, and 
schools must teach all students those standards to help 
prepare them for college and careers. 
● States, districts, and schools must share information with 
families, students, and communities regarding annual 
statewide assessments that measure students' progress 
toward these high standards. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 3 of 41 
 
 
● States and districts must establish systems of support and 
accountability for all schools and provide particular support 
to the lowest-performing schools, schools with low-
performing subgroups, and schools with low graduation 
rates. 
Under ESSA, each state must develop a consolidated state plan 
that documents a comprehensive approach to improving 
outcomes for all students. The Massachusetts Consolidated State 
Plan under the Every Student Succeeds Act, approved in 
September 2017, indicates that the state has included chronic 
absenteeism as one of the accountability index indicators (core 
measures) to be adopted by all schools and school districts. 
Through this policy, each school is given a target goal to reduce 
chronic absenteeism each school year. The BPS Attendance 
Policy described in this document (ACA-18) has been updated to 
reflect changes to the core measures as it relates to attendance 
and chronic absenteeism. 
CHRONIC ABSENTEEISM  
Research recognizes that addressing chronic absenteeism is one 
of the most important priorities in an equitable approach to 
attendance, as chronically absent students are less likely to be 
successful academically and are disproportionately students of 
color. Chronic absenteeism is defined as missing 10 percent or 
more of the school year in any given period. All absences are 
included as it relates to chronic absenteeism, regardless of 
whether the absence is excused or unexcused. For an entire 
school year, a student who misses 18 school days, or about two 
days per month, will be considered chronically absent. Students 
who do not show up to school regularly miss out on fundamental 
learning skills and the chance to build a habit of consistent 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 4 of 41 
 
 
attendance that they can maintain in their post-secondary 
education, their career, and throughout their life.  
Chronic absenteeism significantly increases the likelihood that a 
student will fall off-track academically and struggle to keep pace 
with their peers. Chronic absenteeism in the early grades can 
influence whether a student reads proficiently by the end of the 
third grade; and by the sixth grade, it becomes a leading 
indicator of whether a student will drop out of high school.  
Consistent with the attendance policy is the need to maintain 
accurate, timely, and appropriate records, including information 
on the attendance of students and documentation of reasons for 
absence. Accordingly, all staff must keep accurate records, 
maintain documentation, and communicate with 
parents/caregivers in a timely and effective manner to ensure 
sound school attendance practices. In addition, Boston Public 
Schools is committed to addressing chronic absenteeism 
through prevention and intervention strategies at the school and 
district levels that better support students and families to 
maintain consistently high, on-time attendance. Each school will 
prioritize prevention and intervention strategies that reduce 
chronic student absenteeism.  
The following general principles apply: 
● Schools are required under the law to maintain an accurate 
record of student attendance. 
● Schools at all levels are required to make a concerted effort 
to contact the parent or caregiver each time students are 
absent. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 5 of 41 
 
 
● School leaders bear the final responsibility for attendance in 
their schools and complying with attendance and 
punctuality policies and procedures. 
● External agency support will be sought in those cases where 
school-based meetings do not achieve a positive continuum 
in parental attitude and/or student attendance patterns. 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS ATTENDANCE POLICY 
Attendance: Per the Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education (DESE)’s attendance policy, a student must be at 
school, at a school-related activity, or receiving academic 
instruction for at least half of the school day to be counted as 
present. Students who are not physically present at school but 
receive academic instruction from the district for at least half of 
the school day should be counted as present. Examples of 
academic instruction include tutoring, online learning, or 
distance learning provided by the district. Under this guidance, 
there are limited circumstances in which a student can be 
marked “constructively present.”  
Allowable circumstances to mark a student constructively 
present: 
● Participation in Home & Hospital Instruction 
● Special education school visit 
● Out-of-district special education placement 
● Student is in Department of Youth Services (DYS) custody 
● Succeed Boston (alternative to suspension) 
● College tour or college interview when sponsored by the 
school or approved by the school leader 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 6 of 41 
 
 
Length of Time: A student must attend school for at least a half-
day to be marked “present.” Check with the school leader to 
determine what constitutes a half-day. In most schools, it is: 
3 hours in elementary school 
3 hours and 5 minutes in middle school 
3 hours and 10 minutes in high school 
 
Credit Recovery (No Credit Policy Discontinued): To facilitate 
competency-based grading across the district, the No Credit (NC) 
policy regarding students having three unexcused absences in a 
marking term (four unexcused absences in schools with three 
marking terms) has been discontinued. As a result, schools 
should no longer assign grades of “No Credit (NC)” to students. 
The following guidance has been provided regarding credit 
recovery for students: 
● Passing grades should be competency-based, which may be 
impacted by attendance due to missed assignments or 
schoolwork but should not be tied exclusively to attendance 
or participation. 
● It is essential that schools reach out early and often to 
students at risk of a failing grade. 
● As an alternative, schools may mark a student with an 
“incomplete” grade to enable equitable learning recovery. 
● In all cases, a student not earning a passing grade must be 
given the opportunity and responsibility to equitably 
recover any learning loss or make up the work missed 
within a marking period to earn a passing grade. 
Excused/Unexcused Absences: Certain absences may be 
excused, meaning the absence will not be considered as it relates 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 7 of 41 
 
 
to a referral to truancy court by a supervisor of attendance under 
Massachusetts law (see Massachusetts General Law c.119). 
However, all missed instructional time has the potential to 
negatively impact student outcomes. In addition, all absences are 
included as they relate to chronic absenteeism, regardless of 
whether the absence is excused or unexcused.  
● For an absence to be excused, students must bring in a note 
after each day they are absent.  
● The note must include the date absent, the reason for the 
absence, a phone number where a parent or caregiver can 
be reached, and the parent or caregiver’s signature. 
● Upon return to school, the note must be provided no later 
than seven (7) school days after the absence.  
● Excused absences may include: 
a. An illness or injury that prevents the student from 
attending school. If the illness or hospitalization results in 
absence for three or more consecutive days, a note from a 
health care provider documenting the health problem or 
hospitalization should be attached to the 
parent/caregiver note. Parents/caregivers are not 
expected to have a letter from a health care provider for 
an illness of fewer than three days. The requirement to 
have a letter from a health care provider will not 
supersede specific public health determinations or 
guidance. The school nurse can be consulted regarding 
any questions or changes to this policy based on specific 
circumstances. See COVID-19 Health and Safety Protocol 
for students who exhibit symptoms of COVID-19. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 8 of 41 
 
 
b. A death in the immediate family (parent/caregiver, 
sibling, grandparent, aunt, uncle, cousin) or other 
significant personal or family crisis. 
c. Suspension: Students should be marked as suspended. In 
cases of suspension, the school will provide an 
opportunity for the student to maintain academic 
standing in school by being provided a list of assignments 
and other services which might enable the student to use 
the time out of school productively.  
d. Students assigned to Succeed Boston shall be assigned 
work by the school of assignment and marked 
constructively present.  
e. Court appearances: Students should present evidence of 
the requirement of the court appearance.  
f. Medical or psychological tests during the school day: The 
parent/caregiver must show evidence (such as a note 
from the health center) that the tests could not be 
scheduled after school. 
g. Visits to special education schools in some cases for 
students with disabilities. 
h. Other situations: From time to time, situations over which 
the school, parent/caregiver, and student have little or no 
control may cause absences (for example, transportation 
that does not operate during inclement weather). These 
absences are excusable. The school leader may determine 
that the students impacted shall be marked with an 
excused absence.  
i. Other extraordinary situations, such as a family 
emergency, as approved by the school leader. 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 9 of 41 
 
 
j. Cultural holidays and religious holy days: To 
accommodate students’ cultural and religious 
observances on days when schools are in session, such 
absences will be marked excused with the reason code 
“Religious Holiday” upon submitting a valid note signed 
by a parent or guardian. Please see Superintendent’s 
Circular LGL-06 for more guidance or contact your 
designated supervisor of attendance. The following is a 
list of examples of holidays that are eligible to be excused: 
Diwali, Eid al Adha, Edit al Fitr, Lunar New Year, Orthodox 
Good Friday, Rosh Hashanah, Three Kings Day, and Yom 
Kippur. This is not an exhaustive list, and students may 
request that absences be excused for other cultural 
holidays and religious holy days. Schools should provide 
opportunities for students who are excused to observe 
cultural holidays and religious holy days to submit missed 
assignments or other makeup work for their absence. 
Please contact the Office of Equity, 617-635-9650 or 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org, regarding any concerns 
related to a student absence that is more than two consecutive 
days or is not included on this list. This can include participation 
in a cultural ceremony, bereavement or funeral, pilgrimage, trip, 
etc., that requires students to be absent for more than two days. 
In these instances, a student may be required to meet the 
following criteria to be eligible to be given an excused absence of 
more than two days for observance of a cultural or religious 
holiday or for bereavement to attend a funeral for more than two 
days: 
● The student is not chronically absent, meaning the student 
attended more than 90% of the school days to date.  
● The student is earning a passing grade in all courses.  


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 10 of 41 
 
 
Absences that do not meet the above criteria will be considered 
unexcused. In all instances of student absence, students must be 
given the opportunity to equitably recover any missed work or 
learning loss during a marking period.  
COVID-19 HEALTH AND SAFETY PROTOCOL 
Students, families, and schools should observe the latest 
guidance from the Center for Disease Control (CDC), BPS Health 
Services, and the Boston Public Health Commission as it relates 
to COVID-19 health and safety protocols. Absences as appropriate 
per the most up-to-date COVID-19 protocols are considered 
excused due to “medical/illness.” 
RECORD-KEEPING AND ATTENDANCE IMPROVEMENT 
School leaders bear final responsibility for improving attendance 
in their schools, balancing between accountability and positive 
engagement in their approach, and ensuring that performance 
evaluations reflect staff members’ efforts in complying with this 
policy and achieving the goal of improved attendance. 
School-based governance: Each school’s Attendance Team (AT) 
serves a critical role in prevention and intervention steps for 
students with high absenteeism. It is a best practice for school 
attendance teams to work in conjunction with the SST to refer 
students when all available attendance intervention strategies 
have been unsuccessful. It is also best practice for schools to 
initiate prevention steps with students in the early days of the 
school year or marking period. Schools should review students’ 
past attendance history to initiate prevention steps for students 
with a history of high absenteeism and refer students to the 
school’s AT. Students with three or more unexcused absences will 
be referred by a teacher or the school leader to the school’s AT on 
an ongoing basis. The AT will review the case and work with the 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 11 of 41 
 
 
family to develop a success plan to help the student improve 
attendance. School-based rules should be amended to include 
attendance-related guidelines established through the Quality 
School Plan (QSP). See Attendance Team Overview for additional 
guidance.  
ATTENDANCE IMPROVEMENT PLAN 
Developed as part of the QSP, a school’s Attendance 
Improvement Plan provides a roadmap of the critical prevention 
and intervention activities a school will conduct throughout the 
school year to ensure consistently high, on-time attendance for 
all students. Each school is required to update its attendance 
strategies in the QSP every 90 days. Schools should link a 
document with their attendance prevention and intervention 
steps by tier into the QSP.  
To assess their implementation progress and request more 
intensive assistance, the AT should complete the QSP 
Attendance Implementation Progress Tool (Q3PT) at the 30- and 
60-day marks of the QSP cycle. 
The Attendance Fundamentals by Tier serve as an additional 
resource. 
This program should start with a warm and welcoming school 
climate and should include phone calls home, student meetings, 
parent/caregiver meetings, development of an attendance 
plan/contract, attendance coaching, referral to Student Success 
Team meetings, and/or attendance meetings.  
Consistent follow-up and outreach to students and families 
struggling with chronic absenteeism is a fundamental best 
practice. Schools are expected to use the Panorama Student 
Success Platform to monitor student attendance progress, as 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 12 of 41 
 
 
well as to document interventions and success plans. Schools 
should also connect with community-based programs or 
organizations that can support truancy issues.  
Differentiating the Use of Aspen SIS and Panorama Student 
Success Platform: 
The Aspen Student Information System (SIS) is the system to 
capture critical information for student records and maintain 
compliance with regulatory requirements. As it relates to 
attendance, schools will take attendance in Aspen. However, 
schools expect to use the Panorama Student Success Platform to 
document all attendance prevention and intervention activities, 
using both the Support Notes feature and Tier 2 and 3 
Attendance Success Plans. Student attendance data entered in 
Aspen is transmitted nightly to Panorama for attendance 
monitoring and student success planning purposes. Staff should 
use both Aspen and Panorama as follows:  
Aspen will be used to: 
● input daily student attendance. 
● house the master student schedules and courses. 
● enter course grades. 
● house individual teacher schedules. 
● record teacher attendance. 
● record confidential student journal entries. 
● recommend to Suffolk County Juvenile Court and record 
documentation for an Attendance Intervention Plan (AIP). 
Panorama Student Success will be used to: 
● display student data. 
● house Attendance Success Plans (Tier 2 and Tier 3).  


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 13 of 41 
 
 
● assign team members for communication and 
collaboration. 
● record support notes related to student interventions and 
student success plans. 
● help track information in one place, including assessments 
from Illuminate.  
Note: The SOA is responsible for copying Attendance Success 
Plan documentation from Panorama if the case is recommended 
to the court and in other cases as necessary for compliance. 
All Attendance Success Plans should be recorded as Tier 2 or Tier 
3 plans in Panorama. Panorama allows the planning and 
recording of interventions, along with notes, to monitor the 
effectiveness of these interventions in setting improvement goals 
in the student success planning process. Attendance teams at 
the school level ensure Attendance Success Plans are created 
and monitored in Panorama for all students with high chronic 
absenteeism. At a minimum, every student who has attendance 
at or below 80% (appearing as attendance critical in “red”) should 
have an Attendance Success Plan in Panorama. It is a best 
practice for schools to coordinate and communicate student 
success planning with families. It is also a best practice for 
schools to establish an attendance success plan at the beginning 
of the school year for students who were chronically absent in 
the previous school year. Effective student success planning 
requires sharing the responsibility of plan creation, monitoring, 
and intervention strategies among school staff, including 
teachers, in collaboration with families,  
Who should have an Attendance Success Plan? 
Staff create the plan based on data in Panorama: 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 14 of 41 
 
 
● Tier 2 plans (best practice): Students whose attendance is 
90% or below will display as chronically absent in Panorama 
(yellow). 
● Tier 3 plans (required): Students whose attendance is 80% or 
less will appear as attendance-critical (red). 
An additional quality check:  
● Identify students with an AIP tag in Aspen (this tag indicates 
the student has high absenteeism in the current marking 
period and is eligible for truancy court referral).  
What are the Essential Steps when creating an Attendance 
Success Plan? 
Create Attendance Success Plan in Panorama, and remember 
these two key details: 
● Log as Attendance  
● Log as Tier 2 or Tier 3 
● Monitoring the plan collaborative and keeping it updated is 
essential to successful outcomes 
● Panorama will house student success plans (Tier 2 and Tier 
3) — academic, attendance, behavior. 
You will find more help with Panorama at the Office of Data & 
Accountability (ODA) Platforms Help Site.  
Questions: mtssdata@bostonpublicschools.org 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS PUNCTUALITY POLICY 
Students who arrive after the beginning of the school day are 
tardy. They must follow established tardy procedures to be 
considered present for the day. 
All students are expected to report to school on time every day. It 
is the policy of the Boston School Committee (approved May 24, 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 15 of 41 
 
 
2006) that tardy students should be permitted into the school 
building and not excluded. School leaders are directed to:  
(a) 
review their current school tardy policies in conjunction 
with School Site Councils,  
(b) 
develop reasonable, non-exclusionary practices to deal 
with student tardies and positive incentives to encourage 
punctuality, and  
(c) 
closely monitor compliance with these policies. 
 
It is important to remember that the requirement that tardy 
students be admitted to school does not equal a relaxation of the 
rules covering attendance or tardies. Schools must make every 
effort to encourage punctuality and discourage tardies. Schools 
are also encouraged to distinguish between first-time instances 
and repeated tardiness. 
According to School Committee policy (approved June 6, 2007), 
all high schools are directed to work with their School Site 
Councils and student representatives to establish fair and 
reasonable procedures to decrease student tardiness. These 
procedures must adhere to the following guidelines: 
1. Families must be notified by telephone call, in writing, or by 
email of a student’s tardies. Schools should follow the same 
prevention/intervention steps conducted for student 
absences.  
2. High school tardy procedures should explicitly detail how 
they plan to further involve families in working with 
students who exhibit excessive tardiness. As a rule of thumb, 
excessive tardiness can be defined as being tardy for 10% or 
more of school days. 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 16 of 41 
 
 
3. High schools’ tardy procedures should be linked in their 
Quality School Plan (QSP), the development of which is the 
responsibility of the School Site Council. 
4. As a best practice, all schools should establish attendance 
success plans in Panorama for students exhibiting excessive 
tardiness.  
All high schools, including pilot and Horace Mann charter schools, 
are required to complete their tardy procedures with the above 
guidelines (and other incentives/supports as deemed necessary 
by the School Site Council) no later than October. Each school 
must maintain a copy of its tardy procedures on file. 
1. The teacher must take attendance at the beginning of every 
class period in middle and high schools. After comparison of 
period attendance with the school's daily attendance, 
student cuts should be noted and addressed following the 
appropriate prevention/intervention steps.  
2. Middle and high school students who are tardy should be 
marked absent for any class(es) they miss.  
3. A student must be in attendance at least half of the school 
day to be considered present. Notations of early dismissal 
must be recorded with the time of dismissal, and 
documentation indicating the reason should be kept on file 
in accordance with school protocol. 
ATTENDANCE RECORDS 
The accounting and reporting of the attendance or absence of 
each student assigned to a school is one of the school leader's 
most critical responsibilities. Attendance record-keeping must be 
precise to ensure accurate accounting of each student and 
timely reporting of student attendance daily in the Aspen SIS. 
Every school leader is required to account for the attendance 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 17 of 41 
 
 
and/or absence of students and is required to investigate and 
take appropriate action for each absence. 
GENERAL ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS 
1. Attendance procedures must be reviewed with school staff 
by school leaders during the teacher professional 
development and training program before each school year. 
Each teacher must sign a document maintained at the 
school, verifying that they received these procedures and 
training. 
2. During the first week of school, homeroom teachers at all 
levels should make personal calls to the parents/guardians/ 
caregivers of their students to introduce themselves and 
invite the parents/guardians/caregivers either to visit the 
school or to call at any time to check on the attendance and 
progress of their children. The message should reinforce the 
need for consistent attendance and the procedures a 
parent/caregiver should follow if their child is absent. In the 
event any student has not reported at the start of the school 
year, the teacher should inquire about the student’s failure 
to attend. Teachers should document all communications 
by updating the Aspen SIS with the attendance reason code, 
including if a student will not be returning to school, and 
update Panorama success plans and/or support notes when 
applicable. 
Students are expected to report within eight (8) days of the 
first day of school or after an initial assignment. On the 
eighth day, the student will automatically become a DNR 
(Did Not Report) and be discharged from the school. Schools 
have the responsibility to contact the parent/caregiver if a 
student has not reported. Parents/caregivers should be 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 18 of 41 
 
 
made aware of this procedure when called if their children 
have not reported.  
Note: School leaders should always refer to the DNR 
Procedure Memo released annually by the Office of 
Welcome Services for the latest information regarding the 
DNR process. This memo also outlines the procedures for a 
DNR Exception. See the DNR Exception Form.  
DNR PROCEDURE 
For all students who do not report to school (DNR), the 
following procedures are in effect: 
i. 
A student will hold a NAS (Newly Assigned Student) 
code for a maximum of five (5) days after the first 
day of school or after the initial assignment. On the 
sixth day, a student will automatically become a 
DNR (Did Not Report). 
ii. 
A student will hold a DNR code for a maximum of 
three (3) days. At the end of the third day, a DNR 
student will automatically lose their seat at the 
assigned school. This will occur at the close of 
business on the eighth (8th) day of school.  
iii. 
On the third day of DNR status (or on the eighth day 
since the first day of school or of initial assignment), 
a student's seat will be eliminated, allowing the 
Office of Welcome Services to assign another 
student to that seat. 
iv. 
The student will remain on the DNR list of the 
school. See below for important details:  


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 19 of 41 
 
 
Each school leader still has the responsibility of 
investigating the situation and, if necessary, ultimately 
discharging the student to remove them from the DNR list.  
The discharge cannot happen until the school has 
conducted an exit interview and collected appropriate 
documentation from the family. This documentation must 
be uploaded to Aspen. Please see the DNR Aspen Guide. 
If you know that a student does not plan to enroll in BPS for 
the current school year and you have collected appropriate 
documentation from the family, you can withdraw them 
from BPS without waiting for them to be withdrawn as a 
DNR at the end of the eight-day period.  
Please make sure to maintain a record of the appropriate 
documentation, upload it to Aspen, and use the appropriate 
discharge code when discharging the student. Here is a link 
to the BPS Discharge Codes.  
For students with an IEP, the Special Education Department 
must also conduct an exit interview to inform the student 
and caregivers of their rights.  
The assigned supervisor of attendance (SOA) should be 
notified to provide additional assistance when a school 
cannot locate a student.  
Note: The DNR process does not automatically discharge 
any high-need special education students in an inclusion or 
substantially separate program (.3 or .4 students). 
3. School Attendance Teams (AT) at all levels are directed to 
monitor student attendance using the Panorama Student 
Success Platform and, in cases that so require, make 
referrals to the Student Success Team (SST) and/or the 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 20 of 41 
 
 
appropriate health or human/social service agencies or 
district services.  
One of the initial responsibilities of the AT, in collaboration 
with the SST, shall be to address the issues of (1) DNR 
students and (2) students who were chronically absent in 
the previous school year.  
The status of each student who did not report (DNR) at the 
start of the school year must also be investigated and 
determined before discharging the student. 
A primary focus of the AT is developing school-based 
absence prevention and intervention strategies. A three-
tiered attendance system should be established, with 
defined prevention and intervention practices that promote 
consistent attendance among all students. The Attendance 
Fundamentals by Tier is a resource and the BPS Tiered 
Attendance System (TAS) is available to all schools as a 
framework to help establish and improve their attendance 
practices across tiers. 
4. Complex cases and students with extensive patterns of 
chronic absenteeism should be referred to supervisors of 
attendance and/or the SST as appropriate after extensive 
prevention/intervention steps have been tried and 
documented.  
WITHDRAWING STUDENTS 
Once the school year has begun, the withdrawal of students that 
are no longer enrolled at your school can be made at the school 
level, not by Central Office staff. It is imperative that school staff 
verify where the student is enrolled prior to withdrawing a 
student. Please remember to keep documentation as to where 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 21 of 41 
 
 
the student is enrolling. Written or emailed documentation is 
preferred. If the family texts you, we suggest sending a 
screenshot to your email to make sure it is saved. This 
documentation must be uploaded to the Aspen SIS. Also, please 
make sure to use the appropriate discharge code when you 
withdraw the student from BPS. Here are BPS Discharge Codes. 
Acceptable documentation for withdrawing students includes: 
1. A written request for a student’s records from a receiving 
public or private high school or an educational program 
(that culminates in a regular high school diploma). This 
includes requests from the receiving school that come to 
the district through Scrib Order. 
2. Written record of a response from an official in the receiving 
school or program acknowledging the student’s enrollment. 
3. Written confirmation that a student has moved to another 
country and will be continuing their education. For example, 
if a parent informs a school administrator that the family is 
leaving the country, the school administrator may 
document this conversation in writing. 
4. Letter from a parent/guardian updating the school 
enrollment status of their child, including indication that 
they will be continuing their education elsewhere. 
5. Letter from the BPS Office of Expanded Learning Time 
indicating an approved Educational Plan for homeschooling. 
6. Record from the state's data system (Edwin DESE Security 
Portal - Central Office Process) 
If you do not have the above documentation at the time of 
withdrawal, the student must be withdrawn as a dropout. See 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 22 of 41 
 
 
Aspen HelpDoc BPS Withdrawal Codes for a table of withdrawal 
codes with acceptable matching documentation. 
Note: The assigned supervisor of attendance should be notified 
to provide additional assistance when a school cannot locate a 
student.  
DISCHARGE PROCEDURES 
Students 16 Years of Age or Older On October 1st of the School 
Year – Per MGL Ch. 76 Sec. 18: 
1. By the first week of October, the school leader shall have 
access to the list of students with the designation NAS or 
DNR. 
2. Within 5 days of the tenth consecutive absence, the school 
leader must contact in writing (in the primary language 
spoken in the home) the parent/caregiver of the student 16 
years of age or older to inform them of the requirements of 
MGL c.76 s.18, and to request a meeting to discuss the 
educational implications for the student if they do not 
return to school, the benefits of earning a diploma, the 
student’s reason(s) for wanting to leave school, and to 
consider alternative education or other placements. The 
notice shall offer at least two dates and times for an exit 
interview, that the parties will agree to a date, and that the 
meeting will take place within 10 days after the sending of 
the notice. The school leader must reproduce and use the 
sample form letter linked here and submit a copy to the 
director of the BPS Re-Engagement Center within one 
week. For students who have an IEP, the Special Education 
Department must also conduct an exit interview to inform 
the student and caregivers of their additional due process 
rights.  


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 23 of 41 
 
 
3. The school leader must conduct the meeting at the 
convenience of the parent/caregiver, but within 10 days of 
the sending of the notice. Upon parent/caregiver request, an 
extension not to exceed 14 days may be granted. 
4. If the student reports to school after the exit interview with 
the parent/caregiver, the school leader must ensure that the 
student is marked “P” on the attendance record.  
5. If the student does not or shall not return to school after the 
exit interview with the parent/caregiver, the school leader 
must request a statement of the parent/caregiver on the 
Sample Form Letter linked here. Submit a copy of this letter 
to the BPS Re-Engagement Center and operational leader 
and discharge the student using the protocol described in 
this circular. This form is for a student whose assignment 
within the Boston Public Schools is to be terminated, i.e., the 
student is going to a private or public school outside the 
City of Boston, or the unknown student whose absences 
have been investigated thoroughly, or the student who has 
"dropped out" of school. This process requires the following: 
a. Retain one copy of the documentation at the school in 
which the discharge is initiated. 
b. Upload documentation to the Aspen SIS. 
c. Issue one copy to the parent/caregiver of the student 
going to a private school or another public school 
system. 
d. Issue one copy to the superintendent of the new school 
system. If the student has transferred to either a 
private school or to a charter school, this copy is sent to 
the principal of the new school. 


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 24 of 41 
 
 
6. Only after a good-faith effort to include the parent/caregiver 
can the exit interview with the student take place without 
the presence of the parent/caregiver. 
7. The school leader must maintain detailed and readily 
accessible records for each student justifying the activation 
of discharge, which should be uploaded to the Aspen SIS. 
Students Under 6 Years of Age on October 1st of the School Year 
1. Within a week after the receipt of the NAS/DNR printout, 
the school leader must contact in writing the 
parent/caregiver of the student to inform them that a place 
for the student has been reserved in the educational 
program of the school. The parent/caregiver is encouraged 
to ensure the student's attendance, AND the student must 
report within one week, or the student shall be discharged. 
Please use the attached form letter. 
2. If the student does not report within one week, the school 
leader must discharge the student according to the 
procedures described in this circular. No additional 
communication with the parent/caregiver is required.  
Note: School leaders shall not discharge a student between 
the ages of six and sixteen years until all procedures noted 
in this circular are completed. Written notice should be 
received by the supervisors of attendance.  
Discharge Codes 
It is important to use the appropriate discharge code when 
withdrawing the student from BPS. Here is a copy of the 
BPS Discharge Codes. 


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 25 of 41 
 
 
GENERAL ATTENDANCE AND PUNCTUALITY PROCEDURES 
1. School leaders must designate a member of their staff who 
will be responsible for coordinating and monitoring the 
school's attendance plan. This person shall report directly to 
the building administrator concerning this effort and should 
be part of the school AT. A best practice is to have this 
person lead or co-facilitate the AT when appropriate. The 
plan should take a whole-school approach and fully engage 
the staff in implementing a tiered attendance system. 
School leaders should also ensure that staff is assigned to 
monitor attendance data and trends on an ongoing basis, 
which may require additional training from the Office of 
Instructional and Information Technology, Office of Data 
and Accountability, or Department of Opportunity Youth 
(SOAs). 
2. Each student is marked Absent in the Student Information 
System (SIS) on the first day of school and must be marked 
Present to begin official enrollment. Enter a P on the first 
day of attendance. Students who appear after the first day 
of school should be entered on the date of appearance with 
a P. 
3. Official attendance will be taken and reported on the SIS 
system by teachers. The central office will make an 
automated call to all students coded as Absent by 11:00 am 
every day.  
4. Students who arrive after the beginning of the day are tardy. 
They must follow established tardy procedures to be 
considered present for the day.  


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 26 of 41 
 
 
SUGGESTED STRATEGIES TO ADDRESS TARDINESS AND 
ABSENTEEISM 
In developing their Attendance Improvement Plan, schools 
should focus on a positive approach to attendance, using 
consistent prevention/intervention steps and implementing 
specific strategies to address tardiness and absenteeism. The 
district has developed a Tiered Attendance System (TAS) to 
support schools in ensuring the consistency and effectiveness of 
their attendance practices across the school, while the Panorama 
Student Success Platform provides a framework to track and 
monitor individual student attendance, interventions, and 
success planning. See also Attendance Fundamentals by Tier.  
Examples of strategies to address tardiness and absenteeism 
include: 
● Tiered intervention and prevention programs: 
Tier 1: Reliable attendance reporting from every 
classroom; positive school climate initiatives such as 
maintaining positive relationships among school staff, 
students, and families; consistent intervention and 
prevention activities with documentation in Panorama; 
School Attendance Committee; School Attendance 
Culture. 
Tier 2: Targeted attendance letters; attendance contracts; 
student/family conferences; attendance success plans; 
attendance coaching; mentorship programming. 
Tier 3: Intensive case management or mentorship; 
specialized programming; assigning staff to intentional 
student check-ins; connections with and/or referrals to 
specific support services or community resources. 
● Use of restorative justice practices 


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 27 of 41 
 
 
● Parent/caregiver and/or student-centered conferences 
● Contracting with the student and/or parent/caregiver 
● Learning Recovery/Attendance Buy-Back Time (for repeated 
tardiness or unexcused absences) 
Note: Schools are prohibited from excluding students from 
physical activity during the school day, such as during recess 
or physical education, as a disciplinary consequence. However, 
a student may be prohibited from participating in athletics or 
extracurricular activities on a school day when an unexcused 
absence causes a student to miss more than 50% of the school 
day.  
Suggested other steps: 
● Make MBTA schedules available at schools. 
● Post rules on tardiness and punctuality in visible locations. 
● Hold a conference with student and family for repeated 
tardiness. 
● Make phone calls to families of students who are tardy. 
● Work with Attendance Team and/or SST and/or to 
investigate root causes for student tardiness. 
● Establish Student Planning Centers. 
Please see the BPS Code of Conduct for additional guidance 
regarding suggested strategies.  
NOTIFICATION TO PARENTS/CAREGIVERS WHEN STUDENTS 
ARE ABSENT 
School leaders should inform all students and parents/caregivers 
by means of a written bulletin, newsletter, or SchoolMessenger at 
the beginning of each school year of the Attendance Policy and 
the basic school attendance procedures adopted by the School 


Page 28:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 28 of 41 
 
 
Site Council. This information should be sent in the language of 
the home.  
Parents/caregivers should be advised that a signed note of 
explanation shall be required each time a student is absent. The 
note should state the date(s) of absence, the reason, the 
parent/caregiver contact information, and the parent/caregiver 
signature. The note should be sent in on the day the student 
returns to school. The note must be received within seven (7) 
school days following the absence. Here is a Sample 
Parent/Caregiver Note for Excused Absence. Schools are 
expected to use Panorama to document and monitor attendance 
intervention activities, including documentation of each step 
described below. 
1. First Absence 
The building administrator is responsible for ensuring that 
school staff notifies parents/caregivers by telephone of all 
student absences. This is best accomplished by the 
homeroom teacher. In these conversations, 
parents/caregivers should be reminded of (1) the need to 
submit a note of explanation to document the reason each 
time a student is absent, (2) the importance of consistent, 
on-time attendance for a student to be successful in school, 
and (3) that unexcused absences could result in the student 
falling behind academically. 
2. Second and Third Absence 
Parents/caregivers must be notified in writing no later than 
the student’s third absence (even if the absences were 
“excused”) and on a regular basis thereafter. This notification 
should include the attendance requirement, the number of 


Page 29:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 29 of 41 
 
 
days missed compared to the number of school days in the 
marking period, and the impact of continued absence on 
the student’s success. Note: These absences do not need to 
be consecutive. This letter must be written in the language 
of the home. Here is a Sample Absence Letter which can be 
placed on the school’s letterhead. 
3. Third Unexcused Absence 
After the third unexcused absence, the student must be 
referred to the SST by the homeroom teacher. The team will 
review the case and meet to develop recommendations to 
assist the student in improving attendance. The team may 
invite the parent/caregiver and, at the secondary level, the 
student to the meeting; however, if the parent/caregiver 
does not attend the meeting, an effort must be made by the 
school to contact and discuss the case with the 
parent/caregiver. It is recommended that the SST develop 
an attendance success plan in Panorama at this step. 
 
 


Page 30:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 30 of 41 
 
 
4. Fourth Unexcused Absence 
At the fourth unexcused absence in any term, a meeting 
shall be convened by the school leader, to which the 
parent/caregiver shall be invited. If the school is unable to 
contact the parent/caregiver, a home visit should be 
conducted. The implications of student absence from 
school, as well as the current academic status of the 
student, will be discussed at this meeting. The success plan 
developed by the SST after the third unexcused absence 
should be reviewed.  
5. Fifth Through Seventh Unexcused Absence 
At the fifth unexcused absence, the student and the family 
should be referred to the Family Resource Center or 
assigned supervisor of attendance.  
6. Eighth Unexcused Absence 
After the eighth unexcused absence, for a student younger 
than 16 years of age, the school’s designated attendance 
representative shall coordinate with the assigned supervisor 
of attendance to determine if it is necessary and appropriate 
to file a truancy case with the Suffolk County Juvenile Court. 
Instructions for Recommending an Attendance Intervention 
Plan for Court describe the necessary steps to recommend a 
case for court. In addition, the school should coordinate with 
the school social worker for additional support.  
This Notification to Parents/Caregivers When Students Are 
Absent condenses the process described above. It serves as a 
reference document for staff. 


Page 31:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 31 of 41 
 
 
Absence, tardy, and early dismissal notations must be recorded in 
the Aspen SIS daily as the official system of record. School-wide 
attendance monitoring using the Panorama Student Success 
Platform should be conducted by the school leader or their 
designee on a regular basis, but no less frequently than monthly. 
EXCUSED ABSENCES 
The student attendance record must be updated to reflect the 
excused absence. An excused absence is defined as an absence 
caused by sickness, injury, hospitalization, court appearances, 
religious holy days, or the death of an immediate family member.  
The school may accept other reasons for an excused absence as 
approved by the school leader; however, if a note of explanation 
is not received, the absence shall be deemed “unexcused.” 
However, it is important to remember that all absences are 
included as it relates to chronic absenteeism, regardless of 
whether the absence is excused or unexcused. Prevention and 
intervention steps should be conducted by the school to 
minimize missed instructional time, regardless of whether 
absences are excused or unexcused. In addition, 
parents/caregivers should be informed of the definition of 
chronic absenteeism and the impact it has on student outcomes: 
Chronic absenteeism is defined as missing 10 percent or more of 
the school year in any given period. All absences are included as 
it relates to chronic absenteeism, regardless of whether the 
absence is excused or unexcused. For an entire school year, a 
student who misses 18 school days, or about two days per month, 
will be considered chronically absent.  
Parents/guardians/caregivers should be informed, as part of the 
School-Based Rules, of those reasons that are accepted as 


Page 32:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 32 of 41 
 
 
“excused” and those that are not acceptable to excuse an 
absence. 
NOTIFICATION TO PARENTS/CAREGIVERS SHOULD A CHILD 
LEAVE SCHOOL 
1. All students must be supervised by a responsible adult at all 
times during the school day. 
2. Should a child be noted as missing, the school leader should 
be notified immediately. 
3. After an initial search of the school and immediate 
neighborhood, the parent/caregiver should be notified by 
telephone as promptly as possible, and the appropriate 
departments should be notified. (See Superintendent’s 
Circular SAF-09, Lost Children Procedures). 
SAFETY CONCERNS RELATED TO ATTENDANCE 
To maximize the protection and safety of all students, schools 
should take the following measures: 
1. Emphasize to the parent/caregiver that they should arrange 
to be sure that their children reach the bus stop on time 
every morning and that they board the bus. This should be 
stressed in newsletters sent home at the start of each school 
year. 
2. Inform the parent/caregiver that they should notify the 
school by telephone each day that their child will be absent 
due to illness, etc. 
3. Inform the parent/caregiver as soon as possible, including 
through the SchoolMessenger system, of their children’s 
absence. 


Page 33:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 33 of 41 
 
 
4. Ensure that the parent/caregiver supplies the school with 
accurate, up-to-date home and emergency telephone 
numbers and indicates the place their children should go if 
they miss the bus, e.g., the home of a relative, friend, 
neighbor, etc. These emergency numbers should be 
updated as necessary.  
 
HOME & HOSPITAL TUTORING 
When a physician determines that a student is physically unable 
to attend school for more than 14 consecutive days or anticipated 
to accumulate more than 14 absences in a school year, the 
student should be offered tutoring at home or in the hospital. 
The referral should be made to the Home & Hospital Instruction 
program when the school nurse receives a Physician Statement. 
The attendance for students participating in the Home & Hospital 
Instruction Program should be marked “constructively present” 
(CP). The school must document in writing all offers of home 
tutoring and acceptances or rejections by the parent or caregiver. 
If a parent/caregiver rejects home tutoring or other appropriate 
academic services for a child who will be absent for an extended 
period, a record of that rejection must be retained in the 
student’s file, and a 51A should be filed with the Department of 
Children and Families (DCF). When it is deemed by the student’s 
attending physician or pediatrician that they will be confined to a 
home or hospital setting for more than 60 days, the student will 
then be considered for evaluation (if not a student with an IEP); 
or if a student with an IEP, the student will then be considered for 
a possible IEP amendment or new IEP by the Office of Special 
Education under state regulation 603 CMR 28.04(4). 


Page 34:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 34 of 41 
 
 
PROCEDURES FOR REFERRAL TO SUPERVISORS OF 
ATTENDANCE 
SOAs build schools’ capacity to reduce chronic absenteeism. See 
SOA Overview for details on how they can support your school. 
This iteration of the attendance policy calls on schools to take 
ownership of attendance and supportive interventions and to use 
referrals to supervisors of attendance as only a measure of last 
resort. In that context, this circular reflects the Boston Public 
Schools’ procedures for referring students to the supervisors of 
attendance (SOA). Under M.G.L. c.119, Section 21, Section 39E, 
Section 39F, and Section 39G, Boston Juvenile Court may hear 
petitions to determine if a child needs services. In Boston Public 
Schools, only the SOA may file a Child Requiring Assistance (CRA) 
petition on behalf of the district for attendance or behavior-
related matters. 
 It contains guidelines on: 
● Procedures for referrals and Attendance Intervention Plan 
(AIP) 
● Child Requiring Assistance (CRA) filings 
● Adult Failure to Cause (ADF). 
BACKGROUND 
M.G.L. c.119 Part 1 Title XII Chapter 69 Section 10 states that the 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education shall adopt 
regulations establishing a truancy prevention program 
certification process, consistent with the behavioral health and 
public schools framework developed pursuant to section 19 of 
chapter 321 of the acts of 2008, and shall require that the truancy 
prevention program evaluate the level of out-of-school support 
for students and families and address conditions that make 
students more likely to become truant including, but not limited 


Page 35:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 35 of 41 
 
 
to, previously unidentified or inadequately addressed special 
needs, bullying, and harassment. Any truancy prevention 
program established under this section by a school district shall 
meet the requirements for certification adopted by the 
department.  
Supervisors of attendance, working in collaboration with school 
staff and external agencies, may file a court referral based on 
investigative findings, prior attendance patterns, and present 
problematic attendance. The filing of a CRA is the last resort if 
other interventions by school, external agencies, and/or 
attendance staff fail to bring about improvement.   
The SOA may file the following CRA petitions with the mandatory 
parent/caregiver date of birth:   
● Habitually Truant: Civil charge filed on students who miss 
school for 8 days in a quarter. 
● Student Who Repeatedly Fails to Obey Regulations of the 
School: Civil charges filed on students who repeatedly fail to 
obey the lawful and reasonable regulations of the student’s 
school. 
● Adult Failure to Cause: Petition filed when a student’s 
absence is beyond their control, but due to a caretaker’s 
action or inaction, e.g., the child is too young to get to school 
on their own. 
ATTENDANCE INTERVENTION PLAN (AIP) 
While all attendance intervention activities should now be 
documented in the Panorama Student Success Platform, the 
Attendance Intervention Plan (AIP) is available for each student 
having four or more unexcused absences in the Aspen SIS. The 
AIP in Aspen SIS serves the following purposes: 


Page 36:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 36 of 41 
 
 
● To identify students who are eligible for a court referral due 
to eight or more unexcused absences in a marking period. 
● For school leaders to recommend a case to court as a last 
resort when all attendance prevention/intervention 
strategies have been exhausted. 
● To document any compliance-related attendance 
intervention activities, particularly for cases that are 
recommended to the court. Supervisors of attendance 
(SOAs) will ensure that any compliance-related 
documentation from Panorama is also entered to Aspen 
(that is: if a case moves toward the court, the SOA is 
responsible for copying the intervention plan from 
Panorama into Aspen). 
● For a quality check, wherein school attendance staff can 
verify that all students who have an AIP generated in Aspen 
SIS (because of four or more unexcused absences in a 
marking period) also have an Attendance Success Plan 
created in Panorama. As a best practice, all chronically 
absent students should have an Attendance Success Plan in 
Panorama. 
Once a student has eight unexcused absences in a marking 
period, the school leader may recommend the AIP for court in 
the SIS. Supervisors of attendance (SOAs) will ensure that any 
compliance-related documentation is also entered into Aspen, 
including the attendance success plan, with attendance 
intervention steps that were conducted with the student, as 
documented using Panorama.  
The parent/caregiver date of birth (DOB) is required in the judicial 
process. The AIP will require the submission of the 
parent/caregiver date of birth and documentation of intervention 


Page 37:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 37 of 41 
 
 
steps as an Attendance Success Plan in Panorama. Without this 
information, the AIP cannot be recommended for court.  
The SOA will investigate and report their recommendation in the 
SOA comment section. The comments can be viewed by the 
senders and the school leaders. The senders and the school 
leaders can view the comments. Instructions for Recommending 
an Attendance Intervention Plan for Court are here. 
SCHOOL STEPS IN THE CHILD REQUIRING ASSISTANCE (CRA) 
PROCESS 
CRA:  Truancy  
1. Upon the 4th unexcused absence, the school leader or 
designated staff and homeroom teacher will receive an 
email notification from SIS informing them that an 
Attendance Intervention Plan (AIP) has been initiated 
during the term for a student.  
2. Upon the 8th unexcused absence during the term, the 
school leader or designated staff or homeroom teacher can 
recommend that a student AIP be sent to court due to 
excessive absences and non-compliance with the student’s 
Attendance Success Plan, as documented in Panorama. The 
AIP cannot be recommended for court if the student does 
not have an Attendance Success Plan documented in 
Panorama. At this time, the appropriate SOA will investigate 
the case, referring to the action already taken by the school 
to date and to the results that they have reported. The 
investigation may include phone calls, 
home/parent/caregiver work-site visits, school visits and 
telephone calls, letters to parents/caregivers where 
necessary, and, in some cases, contact with and referral to 
involved agencies. 


Page 38:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 38 of 41 
 
 
3. The SOA will report the results of the investigation to the 
school through the SIS system. The supervisor will also ask 
that schools keep them informed of further attendance 
problems. 
4. If attendance does not improve, schools must send 
additional AIPs to the Attendance Office only if the open 
CRA has been closed, alerting the SOA to follow up once 
more. Additional interventions should be documented in 
Panorama to update the SOA on the school's subsequent 
actions and results. 
5. Subsequent investigation and follow-up will occur through 
response in the SIS system, email, or attendance meeting. 
6. Supervisors of attendance, working with school staff, make 
decisions on future action based on investigative findings, 
prior attendance patterns, and correspondence with 
parents/caregivers and the school. One option is court 
referral. The decision to file a CRA is made by the SOA based 
on the finding and results of steps 1-4 and only after 
exhausting all other possible courses of action. The CRA will 
only be filed if the student has accumulated eight or more 
unexcused absences in a single quarter and the school has 
documented intervention steps using the Attendance 
Success Plan feature in Panorama. 
7. When the AIP is recommended for court, the SOA will notify 
the school of this action using the Attendance Supervisor's 
Information Form or will make personal or telephone 
contact. A probation officer will be assigned to the child by 
the court if a CRA is filed. 
8. If attendance does not improve following a CRA filing, 
communication with the assigned probation officer and/or 
the SOA is required. 


Page 39:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 39 of 41 
 
 
CRA FOR STUDENT WHO REPEATEDLY FAILS TO OBEY 
REGULATIONS OF THE SCHOOL 
Decisions to file a Child Requiring Assistance (CRA) for a 
student who repeatedly fails to obey regulations of the school 
with the Suffolk County Juvenile Court should follow the 
prevention/intervention steps and best practices of the BPS 
Code of Conduct, including the Philosophy and Guiding 
Principles. NOTE: A CRA for a student who repeatedly fails to 
obey the regulations of the school can only be filed for 
students in grade 6 and above.  
1. After the third serious violation of school rules, the school 
will request a CRA (repeatedly fails to obey school 
regulations) in the SIS system to the Attendance Office for 
follow-up and investigation. After filling out the request, the 
following documents should be accompanied via fax: copies 
of a letter signed by a school official on letterhead with the 
prevention/intervention steps taken to improve the 
student’s behavior. The school should also provide 
documentation of the three serious violations.  
2. The SOA will investigate the case and determine whether a 
filing is warranted. They will report the decision to the 
school. 
3. When the CRA petition is filed, the SOA will notify the school 
of this action using the attendance supervisor's SIS card or 
will make personal or telephone contact. A probation officer 
will be assigned to the child by the court. 
4. If the student’s behavior does not improve following a CRA 
filing, communication with the assigned probation officer 
and/or the SOA is required, and the school should continue 
to proceed with appropriate action under the Code of 
Conduct. 


Page 40:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 40 of 41 
 
 
CRA: ADULT-FAILURE-TO-CAUSE PROCESS (ADF) 
These cases are criminal complaints filed against 
parents/caregivers who willfully prevent their children from 
attending school. This is a serious charge requiring the sworn 
testimony of the SOA on the school's behalf. Courts can fine 
parents/caregivers, and in extreme cases, further 
consequences can result from non-compliance. 
The steps are the same as described for CRA cases, except that 
it is filed against the parent/caregiver if the investigation 
conducted by the SOA finds evidence to justify the filing, and 
information about the parent/caregiver is required, which, in 
some cases, can only be obtained by school staff. For example, 
the complaint cannot be filed without the parent/caregiver’s 
date of birth and physical description, as well as documented 
evidence of attendance interventions using the Attendance 
Success Plan feature in Panorama. Therefore, it is important 
that school staff capture this information in advance of 
recommending a case for court.  
 
 


Page 41:
Superintendent’s Circular ACA-18 
Page 41 of 41 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Opportunity Youth 
Department: 
Department of Opportunity Youth 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-9620 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


