Page 1:
 
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
AMT-01 
Version 01 
 
 
EXAM SCHOOL ADMISSIONS: APPLICATION AND 
ADMISSIONS PROCESS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Boston Public Schools has three exam schools: Boston Latin 
Academy, Boston Latin School, and the John D. O'Bryant School 
of Mathematics and Science. All three schools accept new 
students for grades 7 and 9.  John D. O’Bryant School accepts a 
small number of new students in grade 10.  This circular outlines 
operational details regarding the application process, GPA 
calculation, test administration, and invitations. 
 
ELIGIBILITY 
Students currently enrolled in grades 6, 8, or 9 and residing in the 
City of Boston are eligible to apply to one of our exam schools for 
the 2025-2026 school year. The application process to the three 
exam schools includes an admissions test, student GPA, and 
Boston residency.  The GPA will account for 70% and the test score 
will account for 30% of the application.  Students may be eligible 
for additional points if they meet specific criteria. 
Students enrolled in a program for limited or interrupted formal 
education (SLIFE) or enrolled in non-credit bearing courses, and 
students that are not completing grade-level curriculum are not 
eligible to apply for exam school admissions. 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 2 of 14 
 
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS 
Students seeking admission to an exam school must be enrolled 
in grades 6, 8, or 9 and live in the City of Boston to be eligible to 
apply for admission for the 2025-2026 school year.  The residence 
of a minor child is presumed to be the legal, primary residence of 
the parent(s) or guardian(s) who have physical custody of the child. 
 Students actively enrolled in a BPS school have previously 
established residency during their initial registration process, and 
do not need to resubmit documentation. Non-BPS families are 
required to verify their residency in the City of Boston with a BPS 
Welcome Center between October 15, 2024, and November 15, 
2024. Families planning to participate in the Fall 2024 test 
administration, must complete the residency verification process 
and register for the test by November 8, 2024.   
Students who must complete the residency verification process 
include: 
● Students attending a private school 
● Students attending a parochial school 
● Students attending METCO program schools 
● Students attending Commonwealth Charter schools 
(excludes UP Academy, Boston Green Academy, and 
other “in-district” BPS charter schools) 
● Students attending schools outside the City of Boston 
● Students being home-schooled 
The residency verification must be completed even if a family has 
other children enrolled in the Boston Public Schools; the student is 
receiving special education services from BPS; the parent/guardian 
is a current City of Boston employee; or if the student was 
previously enrolled in the BPS. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 3 of 14 
 
As part of the verification process, parents are required to provide 
two approved proofs of residency that list the Boston home 
address, the child’s original birth certificate, the child’s 
immunization record, and the parent’s photo identification. In 
addition, an authorization form for the release of student 
information will be provided during the appointment.  Refer to 
the BPS Registration Document Checklist for details. 
There are two ways to apply: 
1. In-person: Schedule an appointment on this form and visit 
one of the four BPS Welcome Centers to work directly with 
a registration specialist. 
2. By computer: Pre-register here and schedule an 
appointment on this form to complete the application with 
a registration specialist. A follow-up appointment either in- 
person or over the phone is required. Please select ’Pre- 
Register for BPS’ from the side menu. Click the first option if 
you have never registered any child for Boston Public 
Schools. Select the second option if you already have an 
Aspen account. 
A list of required and approved  documents for the registration 
application can be found in the BPS Registration Document 
Checklist. 
 
GRADE POINT AVERAGE 
The Exam Schools policy establishes baseline criteria for eligibility 
beyond residency. Students must have a grade point average of B 
or higher to be eligible to apply.  The GPA will include prior year 
marks in English Language Arts (ELA) and Math and the current 
year marks in ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 4 of 14 
 
School leaders are expected to ensure that all marks and course 
numbers are processed before grade point averages are calculated 
by the Boston Public Schools. All applicants’ course marks must be 
submitted along with school certification that they represent 
performance against the Massachusetts curriculum framework 
grade-level standards by February 7, 2025. Changes in the 
transcription or computation of grade point averages will not be 
accepted thereafter. 
The table below outlines which subject areas and grading terms 
are included for the next admission cycle. 
Applying for: SY25-26 Entrance Year 
7th Grade 
• 5th Grade (SY23-24) 4th Quarter OR 
3rd Trimester OR 2nd Semester marks 
in ELA and Math 
• 6th Grade (SY24-25) 1st and 2nd Quarter OR 1st 
Trimester OR 1st Semester marks in ELA, 
Math, Science, and Social Studies 
9th Grade 
• 7th Grade (SY23-24) 4th Quarter OR 
3rd Trimester OR 2nd Semester marks 
in ELA and Math 
• 8th Grade (SY24-25) 1st and 2nd Quarter OR 1st 
Trimester OR 1st Semester marks in ELA, Math, 
Science, and Social Studies 
10th Grade 
• 8th Grade (SY23-24) 4th Quarter OR 
3rd Trimester OR 2nd Semester marks 
in ELA and Math 
• 9th Grade (SY24-25) 1st and 2nd Quarter OR 1st 
Trimester OR 1st Semester marks in ELA, 
Math, Science, and Social Studies 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 5 of 14 
 
For SY25-26 admissions, both prior year and current year marks will 
be considered to calculate the GPA. Prior year marks will be 
weighted 50%, and current year marks will be weighted 50%. For 
students with previous year international school records, only 
current-year marks will be considered. Students must have marks 
in each subject for the GPA to be calculated.  Applications with 
missing course marks, Incomplete (INC), or Pass (P) marks cannot 
be processed and will be classified as ineligible. 
The July 2021 update to the Exam School Admission Policy 
stipulates that the district “develop and publish a coherent 
district equitable grading policy using an A-F scale wherein an A+ 
is treated like an A.” To address this requirement, the 12-point 
grade scale will be rescaled from 0-12 to 0-11, where 0 points 
represent an F and 11 points represent both A+ and A. This will 
result in the following crosswalk from letter marks to point values 
used in the GPA calculation. 
 
Letter 
Mark 
A+ A 
A- B+ B 
B- C+ C 
C- D+ D 
D- F 
Point 
Value 
11 
11 
10 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 
Students with grade 5 transcripts from Boston Public Schools 
receive marks on multiple standards for each subject area using a 
1-4 grading scale.  The marks in Reading, Writing, and Math will be 
converted to a 12-point scale for the purpose of calculating an 
“overall” mark in the subject area (ELA and Math).  If the “overall” 
mark in either subject is above 11, the number will be rounded 
down to 11 to align with the 1–11 point scale. 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 6 of 14 
 
Standard-Base Marks 4 
3 
2 
1 
Point Value 
12 
9 
6 
3 
* Students participating in advanced courses (honors, AWC, AP, etc.) do not 
receive additional points.  
For more information regarding the conversion of marks and 
calculating composite scores, please review the fact sheet. All non-
BPS schools are responsible for determining their own practices for 
grade conversions.  
TEST ADMINISTRATION 
For SY25-26 admissions, completion of the NWEA MAP Growth 
assessment will be required for admissions. Students will have 
two opportunities to take the assessment, with the first in the 
spring of 2024. For students who would like to improve their 
score, or those who do not take the test in the spring, there will 
be a second opportunity in the fall of 2024. Students are not 
required to take the MAP assessment two times, but in the case 
where there are two complete testing events (twice in Reading, 
twice in Math), BPS will use the highest Math Score and the 
highest Reading score, from either test event, for the invitation 
process.  
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 7 of 14 
 
For 6th and 8th grade students currently attending a BPS school, 
the test will be offered during the school day at their school. No 
registration or action is necessary.  However, for students in grade 
9 at a BPS school; and students in grade 8 already attending a BPS 
exam school, the test will be offered on the weekend. Registration 
is required and is detailed below.  
For students not currently attending a BPS school, the test will 
also be offered on the weekend. Registration for the weekend 
test is required and can be completed online or via a paper form. 
Both will be posted on the exam schools BPS website.  
ADDITIONAL POINTS 
In addition to GPA and test scores, students may be eligible to 
receive additional points towards their application. Students living 
in housing owned by the Boston Housing Authority, are in the 
care of the Department of Children and Families, or are 
experiencing homelessness at any time during the time period in 
which BPS collects grades (March 2024-February 2025) will 
receive an additional fifteen (15) points. 
Students attending a school in the spring of grade 5 (if applying 
for 7th grade at an exam school), grade 7 (if applying for 9th 
grade at an exam school), or grade 8 (if applying for 10th grade at 
the O’Bryant) where 40% or more of the students enrolled come 
from economically disadvantaged families over a 5-year average 
will receive between two (2) and ten (10) additional points, 
depending on the student's socioeconomic tier.  (See below for 
more information about the socioeconomic tiers).  
The district will determine the list of schools eligible for these 
additional points, as defined by the Department of Elementary 
and Secondary Education (DESE). 
 To learn more about how the additional points are calculated, 
you can view the Superintendent’s memorandum.  


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 8 of 14 
 
In the situation where a student has attended more than one 
school in the spring of the 2023-2024 school year, the school that 
submits the student's final marking period course marks will be 
used to determine eligibility for the additional points.  
In the situation where the student is a new resident of the City of 
Boston, the school that submits course marks for the first 
marking period of the 2024-2025 school year will be used to 
determine eligibility for the additional points.  
Additional points are not additive, so students receiving fifteen 
points will not receive any additional points, even if they also 
attend a school where 40% or more of the students enrolled 
come from economically disadvantaged families. 
 
COMPOSITE SCORE CALCULATION 
Admissions to exam schools will use a composite score 
calculation that combines GPA, test scores, and additional points 
(if eligible) into one number. The GPA and test score component 
will be on a 0-100 scale. Students receiving additional points (as 
described below) may receive a maximum score of 110 or 115. 
For SY25-26 admissions and beyond, grades will make up 70% of 
the composite score, and the test score will make up 30% of the 
composite score. The GPA will be divided by 11 (based on the 11-
point scale explained above) and multiplied by 70. Similarly, the 
test score will be scaled to a possible total of 30. The GPA 
component and the test score component will be added together.  
Any additional points that the student receives will be added to 
the total score. For more detail on how BPS calculates students’ 
composite scores, please review the Composite Score Calculation 
Fact Sheet.  


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 9 of 14 
 
TIERS 
Applicants will be placed into one of eight socioeconomic status 
(SES) tiers based on their home address. Families can visit 
bostonpublicschools.org/exam and use the interactive SES Tier 
map to learn what SES tier their child will be considered within. 
The socioeconomic status tiers are based on a socioeconomic 
score for each census tract in the city and are updated each year 
as annual data becomes available, typically in late winter of each 
year. The socioeconomic score is a composite of five measures 
from the American Community Survey and indicates economic 
need relative to the other census tracts in the city. 
• Percentage of persons below poverty 
• Percent of households not occupied by the owner 
• Percent of families headed by a single parent 
• Percent of households where limited English is spoken 
• Educational attainment 
The tiers are proportionally sized based on the number of school- 
aged children in grades 5-8 living in each census tract. Each tier 
will have approximately the same number of seats available.  
Within each tier, students will be ranked from the highest to the 
lowest based on their composite score. If students have the same 
composite score, a random number will be used to determine their 
rank order. The student with the higher random number will be 
ranked higher than the other(s).  
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 10 of 14 
 
 
INVITATIONS 
Invitations will be awarded through ten (10) invitation cycles, with 
10% of seats available to each tier distributed in each cycle. Tier 1, 
which is the tier with the lowest SES score will go first in each 
cycle, and Tier 8, which is the tier with the highest SES score will go 
last in each cycle. 
Students will be invited to their highest-ranked exam school with 
an available seat. If all the seats at a student’s first-choice school 
are already allocated, the student will receive an invitation to 
their second-choice school. If all those seats are already allocated, 
the student will receive an invitation to their third-choice school 
until all seats are filled. 
SCHOOL CHOICE 
 Students must rank at least one exam school to be considered for 
an invitation. However, a student may list up to three exam 
schools and rank those choices by preference. Students will not 
be considered for a school they did not list. For example, if a 
student only ranks Boston Latin School and O’Bryant, they will 
only be considered for invitations to those two schools. If a 
student does not submit choice rankings for any exam schools, 
they will not be considered for any exam school for an invitation.  
BPS grade 6 and 8 students (during the fall of 2024) will receive a 
continuous choice form in January 2025, through email and their 
BPS school, where they will be asked to submit their school 
preferences for the 2025-2026 school year. The continuous choice 
form for BPS students is due by February 7, 2025.  
BPS grade 9 students, and BPS grade 8 students already enrolled 
in an exam school (during the fall of 2024), will be required to visit 
a BPS Welcome Center to submit ranked school choices through 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 11 of 14 
 
a transfer request in January 2025. This group of students will not 
receive a continuous choice form automatically through their BPS 
school. 
Non-BPS students will rank schools during the residency 
verification process, which ends on the third Friday of November 
or November 15, 2024.  
All submitted applications with ranked schools will be processed 
at the same time. 
 
WAITLISTS 
Boston Public Schools will create waitlists for the three exam 
schools for all entry grade levels. 
Students invited to an exam school for SY 2025-2026 will have 
eight days from the first day of school to accept or decline their 
invitation with the BPS Office of Welcome Services. We 
encourage all families to respond to the invitation by the end of 
May to ensure all students are assigned in a timely manner. 
Students who met the minimum eligibility criteria but did not 
receive an invitation to their top-ranked exam school will be 
eligible to be placed on a waitlist for any exam school to which 
they did not get invited. For all three exam schools, admissions 
will only be open for students entering grade 7 and grade 9, as 
well as grade 10 only for the O’Bryant school, and waitlists will 
only be created for those grades. 
Students must have ranked the exam school in order to be 
considered for an invitation and be eligible to be placed on the 
waitlist. Students who receive an exam school invitation to their 
first-choice school will not be eligible to be placed on any waitlist.  
Please note that BPS builds in some expected attrition into the 
number of students invited to each exam school every year by 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 12 of 14 
 
assigning more students than seats. As a result, students may 
not be called from the waitlist until that expected attrition is 
accounted for. 
Waitlists will be capped at 100 students for each school and 
grade. The ordering of the waitlist will function as a continuation 
of the exam school invitation policy. Students will be ordered by 
their composite score and random number within their SES Tier. 
For students with the same composite score, the random 
number will be used as the tiebreaker. 
During the invitation process, students are invited to exam 
schools through 10 invitation cycles, with approximately the 
same number of seats being given out to students from each SES 
Tier in each cycle. Once all the invitations have been distributed 
for a given school and grade, we will continue to follow the same 
process for the purpose of adding students to the waitlist. 
The exam school waitlists will be handled separately from the 
waitlist process for open-enrollment BPS schools. In other words, 
a student can be on an exam school waitlist as well as other BPS 
schools.  Accepting a seat off a waitlist at a different school will 
not affect a student’s place on the exam school waitlist.  
BPS will contact families via phone and email as seats become 
available at the three exam schools. Families will have up to 24 
hours to accept or decline the exam school waitlist.  Please 
ensure your contact information is up to date by visiting a BPS 
Welcome Center. No exceptions to the 24-hour acceptance 
deadline will be made. 
The SY25-26 waitlists will remain in effect until November 30, 
2025. After that date, the waitlists will expire. Waitlists do not roll 
over to future years. 
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 13 of 14 
 
TRANSFERS 
Transfers between the three exam schools are no longer permitted.  
Students are not allowed to change their invitation to a different 
exam school, or transfer between the exam schools after 
matriculation.  If a student is interested in moving to a different 
exam school for grades 9 or 10, they must reapply through the 
formal application process. 
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES: 
October 15 - 
November 8, 2024 
Priority residency verification period for non-
BPS families & registration period for the 
MAP Growth weekend test 
November 11-
November 15, 2024 
Final week of residency verification for non-
BPS families registered for the MAP Growth 
weekend test administration 
December 2-13 
In-school test administration period 
December 7, 2024 
Weekend test administration of MAP 
Growth 
January 2 - 
February 7, 2025 
Marks submitted and certified by sending 
school 
March 2025 
Application status update sent to all 
applicants  
April or May 2025 
Admission decision notifications sent to all 
applicants  
 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular ATM-01 
Page 14 of 14 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Student Assignment and 
Selective Admissions 
Department: 
Welcome Services 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9085 
Email: 
exam@bostonpublicschools.org 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


