Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
AMT-03 
Version 01 
 
 
ASSIGNMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH SERVICES 
(DYS) COMMITTED STUDENTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
The attached procedures for the assignment of Department of 
Youth Services (DYS) committed students new to the Boston 
Public Schools or re-entering the Boston Public Schools after 
previous discharges have been developed to ensure the efficient 
and appropriate assignment of DYS committed students to the 
Boston Public Schools. 
These procedures are the result of a collaborative effort between 
staff of the Boston Public Schools and the Department of Youth 
Services and should be adhered to in all cases pertaining to DYS 
students. 
I. 
PROCEDURES FOR ASSIGNMENT OF DYS-COMMITTED 
STUDENTS NEW TO THE BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS OR 
RE-ENTERING THE BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS AFTER 
PREVIOUS DISCHARGES 
To initiate and successfully implement the assignment of DYS 
committed students to the Boston Public Schools, the 
procedures listed below shall apply: 
(Please refer to Section II below for additional requirements for 
students recommended for special education.) 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
1. Prior to the student's re-entering BPS, DYS shall write a 
letter on its stationery including the following: 
a. Verification of parent's address 
b. Verification of the student’s address if different from 
the address the student will live at once in a BPS 
program 
c. Purpose of re-enrollment, i.e., to start school or 
request an evaluation by special education 
d. Name, address, and telephone number of DYS 
education liaison and caseworker 
e. Reason, if any, why the student should not be re-
assigned to the previous school. 
2. This letter shall be attached to the application and 
forwarded by a DYS caseworker, educational liaison, or 
representative to the student assignment specialist in the 
appropriate Welcome Center at the time of application for 
a school assignment, along with any other documents 
needed to enroll the student in a Boston Public Schools 
program.  Documents should be provided if a student has 
been in an educational setting that would change the 
previous grade. 
3. A DYS caseworker or educational liaison or representative 
shall assist the student in the entry/re-entry process and 
contact the school administrator in order to prepare 
everyone for a successful return. 
4. The returning student must be accompanied by a DYS 
caseworker or educational liaison or representative when 
returning to a Boston public school. 
 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
Upon application, Welcome Center staff shall: 
1. Provide the parent/guardian/student and DYS 
caseworker/liaison with a student registration form. 
2. Explain and assist the parent/guardian/student and DYS 
caseworker/liaison in the completion of the student 
registration form. 
3. Complete the appropriate information on the student 
registration form. 
4. Provide the parent/guardian/student and DYS 
caseworker/liaison with a Home Language Survey form in 
the language of their preference and assist them in the 
completion of the form. 
Attach to the student registration form: 
a. The completed Home Language Survey form. 
b. The DYS letter cited on page 2, (a) and (b).  If no 
address is stated in the letter, attach the proof of 
residency required by Welcome Services (i.e., social 
service agency ID or letter, preprinted, most recent 
utility bills, bank statement, mortgage with address). 
c. Proof of grade if available (i.e., a transcript 
documenting courses and credits earned while in 
DYS facilities or private placement).  If proof of grade 
is not available, the question of appropriate grade 
level placement shall be addressed in the same way 
it is done with non-DYS committed students. 
d. Copies of immunization records for new enrollees. 
5. Sign and specify the date on the bottom of the student 
registration and Home Language Survey forms.   
6. Provide the DYS caseworker/liaison with a copy of the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
assignment form given to the parent/guardian or student. 
NOTES: 
1. DYS is responsible for notifying the school of assignment 
when a student is committed to DYS.  Please note the 
distinction between DYS detained and DYS committed 
students. Notification for committed students will come in 
the form of a request for records. 
2. The Office of Welcome Services is responsible for 
contacting the appropriate special education assistant 
program director in those cases where the DYS student 
re-entering the BPS has a current/signed IEP to determine 
the status of the student.  
II. 
PROCEDURES TO BE FOLLOWED FOR DYS-COMMITTED 
STUDENTS RECOMMENDED FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION 
PROGRAM 
If a DYS committed student is in a detention center, secure 
facility, or private special education school and is recommended 
for a BPS special education program, a special education 
evaluation shall take place. The private school coordinator or 
supervisor for contracted services is responsible for the 
evaluation procedures as follows: 
1. If the DYS student is in a secure facility or detention center, 
the private school coordinator assigned to DYS is responsible 
for the evaluation. 
2. If the DYS student is in a Chapter 766-approved private 
school, the private school coordinator assigned to that 
private school is responsible for the evaluation. 
3. If the DYS student is out of school but last attended a 
Chapter 766-approved private school with Regional 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
Review Board approval within the previous school year, 
the private school coordinator assigned to the previously 
attended private school is responsible for the evaluation.  
If greater than one school year, or a private program is not 
766-approved, the assigned school’s coordinator is 
responsible for the evaluation. 
4. If the DYS student is out of school and has no current 
school assignment, the private school coordinator is 
responsible for the evaluation.  The DYS caseworker/liaison 
is responsible for submitting all current assessments of 
the student. 
The DYS caseworker/educational liaison or representative shall 
determine the student's assigned school by calling the Office of 
Enrollment Services at 617-635-7750. 
DYS shall refer the student to the special education program 
director or SESS coordinator at the assigned school for an 
evaluation.  For a reevaluation, a request letter will be sufficient 
containing the student's current address, telephone number and 
contact person if other than parent.  Special education program 
directors or SESS coordinators are responsible for providing these 
forms and assisting in their coding, and for the evaluation 
procedures. 
The supervisor of contracted services, special education program 
director, SESS coordinator, or private school coordinator and the 
DYS caseworker/liaison shall work jointly to obtain 
parent/guardian signature on a Consent for Evaluation or 
Reevaluation and Release of Information forms.  The supervisor, 
program director, or coordinator shall complete the evaluation or 
reevaluation within the prescribed timelines and, based on the 
TEAM findings and the recommendation written on the 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
Individualized Education Program (IEP), request placement in a 
special education setting, as follows: 
1. If the TEAM recommends that the student be assigned to 
a full or partial inclusion setting other than a sub-separate 
setting, the supervisor, program director, or coordinator 
and the DYS caseworker/liaison shall work jointly to obtain 
written parental approval of the IEP. 
2. Upon receipt of the signed first page of the IEP, the 
supervisor, program director, or coordinator shall give a 
copy of the signed approved IEP to the DYS. 
3. If the TEAM recommends that the student be assigned to 
a substantially separate setting, the supervisor, program 
director, or coordinator shall submit copies of the required 
assessments and IEP to the assignment coordinator for a 
decision regarding the student's placement in 
collaboration with the level assistant director prior to 
requesting or recommending a specific school 
assignment. 
4. The supervisor, program director, or coordinator shall 
present DYS and the parent/guardian/student over 18 
years of age the recommended placement option. 
5. The supervisor, program director, or coordinator and DYS 
shall work jointly to obtain written approval of the IEP.  
6. Upon receipt of the signed IEP, the supervisor, program 
director, or coordinator shall forward a copy of it to the 
appropriate level assistant director and give a copy to the 
DYS caseworker/liaison, who will then attach such copy to 
the DYS letter referred to in Section I.A. and present both 
documents at the time of application for a school 
assignment, along with any other documents needed. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
7. The level assistant director shall complete the DI5 form 
and forward it to the Enrollment Planning and Support 
Unit to finalize the assignment. 
It is important to note that the TEAM may also determine that 
the student needs no special education services.  In these cases, 
the program director or coordinator will provide a letter 
indicating the TEAM decision of no eligibility and provide it to the 
DYS caseworker. 
III. 
PROCEDURES FOR MAINTAINING COMMUNICATION 
BETWEEN DYS AND BPS AFTER A DYS COMMITTED 
STUDENT IS ASSIGNED TO A BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOL 
Contact Person in School of Assignment 
For students who have entered/re-entered the Boston Public 
Schools from a DYS placement, DYS staff shall contact the head 
of school or principal, who may delegate the ongoing liaison 
function to any of the following school-based staff: 
1. For regular education students, the guidance 
counselor/advisor designated by the head of school or 
principal (for secondary schools) or the principal or 
designee (for elementary schools). 
2. For special education students, the special education 
program director or SESS coordinator.  At the middle 
and high school levels, the program director or SESS 
coordinator shall keep the guidance staff informed of 
all DYS contacts made. 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
NOTE:  In the case of both regular and special education DYS 
students, the school's contact person(s) is responsible for keeping 
the building administrator fully informed relative to the status of 
DYS students assigned to the building. 
Contact Persons at DYS 
For students who have entered/re-entered the Boston Public 
Schools from a DYS placement, school-based staff may contact 
the following DYS personnel. (Because names may change, only 
titles are given; school staff may need to ask for specific names.)  
1. Director of caseworker services, 617-727-7575 
2. Educational liaisons, 617-727-7575 
The following steps should be taken in case of emergency: 
1. The head of school/principal who is having an emergency 
with a DYS student should contact the director of casework 
services, 617-727-7575, who will refer the case to the 
appropriate DYS staff. 
2. In non-emergency situations, the head of school/principal or 
designee should maintain the usual ongoing 
communication with the assigned caseworker or other DYS 
staff.  When in doubt, the director of casework services, 617-
727-7575, may be contacted. 
• If a student committed to a DYS facility enrolls in the Boston 
Public Schools at any time during the school year or in the 
summer, DYS shall advise the respective head of 
school/principal that the student was assigned and provide 
the name of the DYS contact person. 
• If a DYS student who enrolled in a designated BPS school 
transfers to another BPS school during the year, the head of 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
school/principal or designee of the sending school shall 
contact the head of school/ principal of the receiving school 
and inform them about the transfer. 
• By September 1st of each year, DYS shall generate a list of 
DYS students assigned to Boston Public Schools, indicating 
the school to which the student is assigned and the DYS 
contact person for each student.  This list should be updated 
bi-weekly until December and monthly thereafter and sent 
to the Office of Welcome Services for verification.  
• DYS shall designate a liaison to meet periodically with staff 
from the Office of Welcome Services or designee to follow up 
on the status of DYS students who have been assigned to 
BPS schools. 
Principals/heads of school interested in annual in-service sessions 
for their staff with participation of DYS staff should contact the 
director of casework services, 617-727-7575.  
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Student Assignment and Selective 
Admissions 
Department: 
Office of Family and Community 
Advancement 
Mailing Address: Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-7698 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-03 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 


