Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER:  
AMT-05 
Version 01 
 
 
REVISED MAXIMUM AGE ASSIGNMENT AND 
ENROLLMENT POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
In July 1999, the Boston School Committee adopted a new policy 
of the Boston Public Schools (BPS) covering the maximum age 
for school attendance. In 2019, the School Committee updated 
the maximum age assignment and enrollment policy to include 
the current options available within the network of BPS 
alternative education schools and new opportunities for students 
to continue their education in the district. The revision to the 
original maximum assignment policy clarifies the process and 
streamlines the enrollment and placement of overage students, 
minimizes the risk of students transitioning to adult school 
programming in the middle of a semester when they turn 22 
years old, and expands the range of program options in Boston 
Central Adult High School (BCAHS) to meet the needs of overage 
students in an adult education setting.  
ENROLLMENT OF OVERAGE STUDENTS (19 YEARS OLD OR 
OLDER) 
• Requires the Re-Engagement Center to assess needs and 
make recommendations for the school/program 
assignments of students new to BPS who are age 19 or 
older. 
• For students 19 years old or older who are more than a year 
from graduation (based on the Re-Engagement Center 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-05 
Page 2 of 6 
 
transcript review), enrollment options will be presented for 
BPS alternative education programs designed to support 
overage, under-credited students. 
• For students 19 years old or older who are less than a year 
from graduation (based on the Re-Engagement Center 
transcript review), enrollment options will be presented for 
traditional high school programs and/or BPS alternative 
education programs designed to support overage students, 
based on availability and student needs. 
EXISTING OVERAGE BPS STUDENTS (19 YEARS OLD OR OLDER) 
• Establishes a systematic proactive review process through 
the Re-Engagement Center whereby the district will 
monitor the progress and counsel currently enrolled 
overage students on an annual basis. 
• Establishes that if a student without special needs (without 
an Individualized Education Plan) will turn 21 years old on or 
before August 31st they will be ineligible for enrollment in a 
BPS traditional or alternative education school for the 
upcoming school year, and will be referred to BCAHS (day 
program, evening program, or a satellite adult education 
program authorized by BCAHS) or an external adult 
education program by the Re-Engagement Center. 
• Establishes that students turning 21 years of age on or after 
September 1st are eligible for enrollment for that school 
year. 
• Clarifies that services for eligible students with disabilities 
will continue to be governed by the Individuals with 
Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and Massachusetts General 
Law c. 71B up to and through that student’s 22nd birthday, 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-05 
Page 3 of 6 
 
when deemed appropriate by an IEP team. 
• Provides guidelines for how the district will support 
students who turn 21 years old on September 1st or later 
through the Re-Engagement Center as they transition into 
programs including: BCAHS (day program, evening 
program, or a satellite adult education program authorized 
by BCAHS) if space is available, or an external adult 
education program. 
THE MAXIMUM AGE ASSIGNMENT POLICY 
All students who are seeking a BPS school assignment, including 
new students, re-enrolling students, and students already 
enrolled in the BPS will be provided enrollment options that will 
best meet their needs in providing a path forward to meeting the 
requirements of a BPS high school diploma. The revised 
maximum age assignment and enrollment policy acknowledges 
that some students may benefit from the alternative education 
setting to ensure they can earn the credits required for 
graduation prior to the end of the school year in which they turn 
21 years old. Students transitioning to alternative education 
schools and programs designed to serve the overage population 
will retain any and all rights and privileges accrued change 
“accrued” to “afforded to students…” to students admitted to or 
enrolled in traditional day school programs as required by 
Massachusetts law. 
New BPS students and re-enrolling students who are age 19 and 
older will be directly referred to the Re-Engagement Center by 
registration specialists at the Welcome Center to determine the 
most appropriate placement. As with all enrollment applications, 
if applicable, the Office of Special Education will review each 
student’s Individualized Education Plan (IEP) and any reports 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-05 
Page 4 of 6 
 
presented by the student and/or family to determine how to 
move forward with options for the student.   
Once referred to the Re-Engagement Center, specialists will 
review each overage student’s transcript, enrollment history, 
state assessment results, and Early Warning Indicators to 
determine the most appropriate placement for the student to 
attain a high school diploma prior to turning 21 years old. 
Enrollment options at traditional high school programs and/or 
alternative education programs will be presented based on 
availability and student need. BPS Welcome Services will 
manage the technical aspects of the enrollment and assignment 
process after the Re-Engagement Center assesses student needs 
and makes recommendations for placement. Current alternative 
schools and programs for SY23 that meet the criteria to serve 
overage students include Boston Adult Technical Academy 
(BATA), Accelerated Diploma Program (ADP), LogOn Academy at 
Boston Collaborative High School, and ABCD’s University High 
School. This list of options for overage students will be updated 
annually as needed. 
Currently enrolled BPS students who will reach the age of 19 
before September 1st of the following school year will be 
provided an option to enroll at an alternative education school or 
program designed for overage and/or under-credited students. In 
the revised policy, the responsibility of these recommendations 
will be designated to Re-Engagement Center specialists. The Re-
Engagement Center will notify headmasters of students who are 
eligible for a transfer based on age during the spring semester. 
Re-Engagement Center specialists will recommend the most 
appropriate placement in an alternative education setting or 
continued enrollment at their current school after a review of 
each overage student’s transcript, state assessment results, 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-05 
Page 5 of 6 
 
enrollment history, and assessment of Early Warning Indicators. 
Additionally, if determined that a transfer is in the student’s best 
interest, the Re-Engagement Center will meet with students and 
their parents, provide multiple alternative education options that 
are appropriate for overage students, and work with students 
and parents through the process of the transfer to the alternative 
education program selected prior to the start of the school year. 
BPS Welcome Services will continue to manage the technical 
aspects of enrollment and assignment process based on these 
recommendations. 
The revised maximum age assignment and enrollment policy 
clarifies that if a student will turn 21 years old on or before August 
31st, the school based-administration team will meet with the 
student, and the student will be required to transition to a 
program designed for adults (e.g. Boston Central Adult High 
School, Department of Developmental Services, or other adult 
school program). Students who will turn 21 years old during the 
school year will be allowed to remain enrolled through the end of 
the school year in June and, if necessary, through the end of 
summer session in August. Once referred to the adult school 
program, the process of this transition will be managed by the 
Re-Engagement Center.  
Students who are unable to earn a high school diploma by the 
end of the school year in which they turn 21 years old will be 
referred to BCAHS (day program, evening program, or a satellite 
adult education program authorized by BCAHS) or an external 
adult education program by Re-Engagement Center specialists 
and the headmaster. The referral will be made prior to the start of 
the final spring semester in which a student is 21 years old to 
support an appropriately timed transition. Prior to the student 
exiting their school and transitioning to an adult school option, 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular AMT-05 
Page 6 of 6 
 
the headmaster and/or academic counselor will provide an exit 
survey and counseling opportunity to share potential placement 
in the Boston area. Upon exiting a BPS traditional or alternative 
high school, the student will be presented with options to 
continue their education toward a high school diploma or HiSET 
certificate (graduation equivalent) through the exit survey and 
meeting offered by the headmaster and/or academic counselor. 
Services for eligible students with disabilities will continue to be 
governed by the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act 
(IDEA) and Massachusetts General Law c. 71B up to and through 
their 22nd birthday, when deemed appropriate by an IEP team. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of the Re-Engagement Center 
Department: 
Office of Secondary Schools, Re-
Engagement Center 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Roxbury 
MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-2273 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


