Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-22 
Version 01 
  
 
GENERAL GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES FOR 
ALL FIELD TRIPS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
IMPORTANT NOTE: These guidelines might be impacted by 
COVID-19 restrictions and are subject to change based on public 
health, international security, or other emergent issues that could 
impact travel. For the most up-to-date information and guidance, 
contact the Department of Global Education 
(OPL@bostonpublicschools.org) for assistance and guidance.  
 
This Superintendent’s Circular provides instructions for 
implementing the field trip policy passed by the Boston School 
Committee on November 20, 2019. 
Program leaders (chaperones) must read this circular in its 
entirety. Principals/heads of school (and/or the district 
department sponsoring the trip) are responsible for ensuring that 
all field trip policies and procedures outlined in this circular and 
all the field trip circulars are adhered to.  
BPS SPONSORED FIELD TRIP: DEFINITION 
A BPS sponsored trip is any trip involving BPS students and 
employees that: uses BPS funds in any way; takes place during 
regular school operating hours; is organized by BPS employee(s) 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 2 of 22 
 
during normal employment hours, either while on BPS property 
or while using BPS-issued technology; and/or is related directly to 
the instructional program at the school. Cases where students 
elect to participate in a third-party travel program with the 
consent of their family, whereby they will travel alone, and not 
with a school group, are not considered BPS sponsored field trips, 
even if students receive funding support from their school or 
district.  
TYPES OF FIELD TRIPS 
BPS has divided field trips into three types:  
● Day field trip  
● Overnight field trip 
● International field trip 
This division ensures that permission forms and procedures are 
directly relevant to the type of trip and activities students will 
engage in.  
Refer to the circular appropriate for your type of trip for further 
details:  
● Day field trips — Superintendent Circular CAO-23 
● Overnight field trips — Superintendent Circular CAO-24 
● International field trips — Superintendent Circular CAO-25 
● Water activities — Superintendent Circular CAO-27 
PURPOSE OF FIELD TRIPS  
All BPS sponsored field trips must serve the purpose of providing 
either instruction or enrichment. Instructional trips support the 
instructional program and should be directly linked to the 
curriculum and standards of that grade level or subject area. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 3 of 22 
 
Enrichment trips contribute to students’ academic, cultural, or 
social development, and aim to deepen their engagement with 
school and learning. Sites for field trips should be carefully 
selected to enrich student learning and exposure to the 
community, new people, places, and activities. Discuss with 
students and families the trip’s purpose, learning goals, and 
behavior expectations in advance, and engage students in 
activities before, during, and after the trip. It is important to note 
the serious obligations that BPS staff members undertake to 
ensure that all field trips are not only educationally sound, but 
also manage risk. 
FIELD TRIP CATEGORIES  
A trip often meets more than one category. 
● Instructional field trip: Enhances a specific curriculum unit 
or serves a broader educational purpose.  
● Cultural field trip: Engages students in cultural awareness or 
understanding experiences to learn more about their own 
cultural identity, or that of others.  
● Community building field trip: May reinforce relationships 
in an existing group of students, prepare students for a 
significant transition into a new structure or community, 
help students work collaboratively, or assist in the 
development of leadership and decision-making skills. 
● Service learning field trip: Students learn the value of 
helping others in their own community and beyond, while 
simultaneously learning from the host community. These 
trips show students how empowering service to others is 
while developing students’ leadership skills. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 4 of 22 
 
● Personal growth and development: Students are exposed 
to new group or individual activities whereby they learn new 
skills and new ideas, develop identity, build self-esteem, 
grow strengths, and build camaraderie.  
FIELD TRIP TYPES AND TIMELINES FOR APPROVAL 
It is necessary that the proper procedures are followed, and that 
copies of all checklists, permission and medical forms are kept on 
file in the school office and, when appropriate, filed with the 
district. If the deadlines and details below are not met, a field trip 
application may be rejected. Please note that trip planning 
timelines (i.e., “twelve weeks (or more) prior to the field trip”, etc.) 
in each circular chronicle the minimal amount of time for 
planning. More time for pre-trip planning is strongly 
recommended for all types of field trips. 
● Day Field Trip (CAO-23): Any domestic trip off school grounds 
that is no more than one day in duration.  
o Day Field Trip forms are submitted to the 
principal/head of school at least 4 weeks in advance 
(or at the principal/head of school’s discretion) and 
approved by the principals/heads of school.  
o Walking field trips are day field trips that require 
walking within a one-mile radius of the school (i.e., 
local garden, park, field, etc.). The Parent/Guardian 
Authorization and Acknowledgement of Risks for 
Walking Trips form will apply for all walking field trips 
during the current school year and will need to be 
updated each school year, or as student/family 
information changes. The school is still required to 
inform families in advance of each walking field trip 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 5 of 22 
 
and obtain principal/head of school approval.  
o All forms, including the signed CAO-23 checklist 
form, are filed at the school. 
o The principal/head of school or designee is the 
emergency contact for day field trips. 
● Overnight Field Trip (CAO-24): Any domestic trip off school 
grounds that involves students’ participation overnight. 
Travel to U.S. territories, including Puerto Rico, the United 
States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and Northern 
Mariana Islands are considered domestic, but are covered 
under international travel insurance. Travel to these 
territories is subject to some forms, requirements, and 
protocols in the CAO-25 International Field Trip guidelines. 
Consult with the Department of Global Education for 
required forms for these destinations. 
o Overnight Field Trip forms are submitted to the 
principal/head of school at least 12 weeks in advance 
and approved by the principals/head of school. 
o All forms, including the signed CAO-24 checklist 
form, are filed at the school.  
o Overnight Field Trip Request forms, the list of 
student names, emergency contact name and 
number, grade, D.O.B, the list of chaperone names 
and their role in the school community, the itinerary, 
and if applicable, train and flight information are sent 
to the district to notify the district of trip plans at 
least 6 weeks in advance. Scan and email the 
Overnight Field Trip Request form and information to 
the appropriate operational leader as well as to the 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 6 of 22 
 
Department of Global Education and follow up with 
both to confirm receipt. 
o The principal/head of school or designee is the 
emergency contact for overnight field trips. 
● International Field Trip (CAO-25): Any trip off school grounds 
that involves travel to a location outside of the United States.  
o International field trips should be planned at least a 
year in advance, to maximize affordability and 
fundraising efforts, and when possible, scheduled 
during non-school time (i.e., school vacations and 
summer).  
o As soon as a trip opportunity becomes known, or 
there is interest in an international travel program, 
teachers must inform their principal/head of school 
and contact the Department of Global Education for 
support and guidance with the CAO-25 application, 
and planning process. No arrangements, payments, 
or deposits should be made without consultation 
with the Department of Global Education and 
formal application approval from the 
superintendent.  
o After consulting with the Department of Global 
Education and head of school, CAO-25 applications 
shall be submitted no less than 9-12 months before 
departure.  The application requires approval by the 
Department of Global Education, which will then 
seek approval from the appropriate district leaders 
before obtaining final approval from the 
superintendent. Again, no arrangements should be 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 7 of 22 
 
made or payments or deposits placed without 
consultation with the Department of Global 
Education and formal application approval from the 
superintendent.  
o The principal/head of school or appointee and the 
director of Global Education or district designee are 
the emergency contacts for international travel 
programs.  
GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR ALL TYPES OF FIELD TRIPS 
● Principals/head of school or the district department 
sponsoring the trip have the primary responsibility to ensure 
that all procedures pertaining to field trips are followed by 
their school and establish clear and transparent internal 
protocols for field trip requests and approvals at the school 
level. 
● All field trip ideas must be preliminarily approved in writing 
by the principal/head of school or district department 
sponsoring the trip prior to the distribution of any 
informational materials on the proposed trip to students 
and their parents/guardians, and prior to fundraising efforts 
or other detailed preparations. Staff are not allowed to sign 
contracts on behalf of the Boston Public Schools. 
● The program leader (the BPS employee and chaperone 
organizing and leading the trip) and supporting chaperones 
must be approved by the principal/head of school, or district 
department sponsoring the trip.  
● The principal/head of school and program leader must 
review and complete the appropriate type of field trip 
circular and checklist throughout the planning process. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 8 of 22 
 
● Program leaders must consult with the principal/head of 
school on potential chaperones and student recruitment. 
Every effort should be made for students to have access to 
the field experience, and for chaperones to be 
representative of the student group and include males and 
females. The selection and approval of chaperones by the 
principal/head of school should be based on the individuals’ 
thorough knowledge of, and rapport with most of the 
student participants. Choose a chaperone team purposefully 
and wisely, considering strengths. Every adult on the trip 
must be a chaperone and have a clear role. 
STUDENT ACCESSIBILITY AND PARTICIPATION 
● Students not enrolled in the Boston Public Schools may not 
participate. 
● Essential participation criteria: The program leader and 
principal/head of school shall work together to establish 
essential participation criteria for the trip. The criteria should 
inform students and parents of all activities and risks 
associated with each itinerary activity and trip location to 
determine what accommodations or modifications may be 
needed for the student to participate successfully and safely 
in all or portions of the trip.  
● Student recruitment: Field trips must be advertised to all 
students (within the whole school, particular grade, 
class/subject, club, or program associated with the trip), 
regardless of their financial situation. Schools shall make 
every reasonable effort to make instructional field trips 
affordable for all students. A student’s ability to pay may not 
be a criterion for field trip participation. If students are 
charged individual fees for participation in a domestic 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 9 of 22 
 
instructional field trip that is directly linked to the 
curriculum and standards, the school or district should 
make every effort to provide scholarships where need is 
expressed.  
● Student accessibility: Students with English Learner status, 
504 plans, and/or IEPs cannot be denied access to field trips 
due to their status or ability. It is the responsibility of the 
school to ensure that all accommodations normally 
provided to a student as indicated in their educational plans 
are made available during a field trip, including medication. 
See Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 for information about 
medical dispensation on field trips.  
● School nurse and guidance counselor consultation: Before 
approval of a field trip, the lead chaperone must consult 
with the school leader to determine if and what type of 
medical assistance is needed for participating students. To 
ensure accessibility, this step is crucial, and must take place 
before the field trip is secured. For additional questions, 
please consult the Health Services Department. Additionally, 
to thoroughly support a student's participation in a field trip, 
at least six weeks before departure (much longer for 
international and overnight field trip programs), consult 
with, and when necessary, receive training from the school 
nurse regarding any students who have medical needs. Also 
consult with the school counselor regarding mental and 
behavioral health needs. If any student has a serious 
medical or mental health condition, be sure that their 
doctor is aware of the essential participation criteria and 
location of the trip and writes a letter indicating that the 
child may safely attend and participate in trip activities. 
Keep this document on file with other key permissions slips 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 10 of 22 
 
and medical forms. 
● Inclusivity: Program leaders must consider their student 
demographics when selecting field trip locations, sites, and 
activities. Specifically determine the impact the locations, 
sites, and activities may have on diverse populations such as 
students of color, EL students, students who identify with 
the LGBTQIA+ community, students with disabilities, those 
who may be in the minority during your field trip 
experience, and those students who belong to groups that 
have experienced marginalization in the location being 
visited. Program leaders must work to prepare students for 
sensitive experiences and ensure that the program is safe 
and inclusive for all students. Consult the Department of 
Global Education for resources if needed.  
● Inclusive accommodations: In collaboration with the 
student and their family, the program leader and 
principal/head of school shall work with transgender and 
gender-nonconforming students to provide 
accommodations (including rooming) that affirm the 
student’s gender identity while also ensuring safety for the 
student and group. Program leaders should work with 
students and families to make sure all travel documents 
(airline ticket, passport, etc.) reflect their legal names as 
listed on government issued identification, while all 
unofficial documents and materials may reflect the 
student’s preferred name. Please view additional rooming 
guidelines from the Office of Equity.  
● Student conduct: The BPS Code of Conduct applies on all 
field trips. BPS students and parents are required to sign a 
BPS Student Traveler & Family Agreement form regarding 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 11 of 22 
 
student conduct while participating in a BPS sponsored 
field trip. Participation in field trips may be denied to any 
student who has demonstrated disregard for the policies 
and rules of BPS or the school, immediately prior to or while 
on the field trip. Parents/guardians and students must be 
made aware of this policy in advance and communicated 
with throughout any processes involving their child not 
participating in a field trip. Following an investigation, if the 
program leader, in consult with the principal/head of school 
and central office staff, determines that a student’s conduct 
while on an overnight trip poses a risk to themselves or the 
safety of the group, or is no longer manageable by BPS staff 
in the field, the district reserves the right to request and 
arrange for that student to return home.  
The district also reserves the right to request that families 
assume responsibility for all, or a portion of the costs 
associated with their child’s return. Students may be subject 
to further disciplinary action and will be provided the 
opportunity to have a formal hearing at the school level 
upon return. The school must document the 
parent/guardian’s consent of this policy prior to the trip.  
● Student dismissal from field program: If a student is to be 
dismissed from an overnight field trip, the student’s 
parent/guardian must be notified in advance and should 
agree to meet the student at the airport or other agreed 
upon transportation destination. If the parent/guardian is 
not reachable, the student’s principal or appropriate school-
based point of contact must be notified and agree to meet 
the student at the airport or other agreed upon destination. 
Students under the age of 16 must be accompanied on their 
flight by a chaperone. Students over the age of 16 may fly 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 12 of 22 
 
unaccompanied, though a chaperone must accompany the 
student to the airport to ensure the student checks in for 
their flight. NOTE: Age requirements are subject to specific 
airline/train/bus guidelines.  
● Provisions for students not attending the trip: If applicable, 
alternative arrangements and/or comparable activities for 
students not attending the trip, or unable to participate in a 
portion of your trip, must be provided. If a student’s family 
elects for their child not to attend a field trip for any reason, 
the student may not be penalized through their grade or 
otherwise. 
● Attendance: Attendance forms should indicate when a 
student is physically absent from the school building on a 
field trip but participating in a school-sponsored program 
being conducted off school grounds. (Note: It is important to 
know and document where students are at all times.) 
CHAPERONE REQUIREMENTS 
● Chaperone Recruitment: Program leaders must consult 
with the principal/head of school on potential chaperones 
and student recruitment. The program leader (lead 
chaperone) must be a BPS employee. Other authorized 
chaperones may include parents and guardians who are 21 
years of age or older. Any parent on the trip must operate in 
the role of chaperone. All chaperones must be approved by 
the head of school/principal. Every effort should be made for 
students to have access to the field trip experience, for 
chaperones to be representative of the student group, and 
for chaperones to include males and females. The selection 
and approval of chaperones by the principal/head of school 
should be based on the individuals’ thorough knowledge of 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 13 of 22 
 
and rapport with most of the student participants. Choose a 
chaperone team purposefully and wisely, considering 
strengths. Every adult on the trip must be a chaperone and 
have a clear role. 
● Non-BPS Chaperones: Other authorized chaperones may 
include parents and volunteers who must be 21 years of age 
or older. All non-BPS employee chaperones must submit a 
yearly CORI/SORI authorization form to the Office of Human 
Capital. Complete the online eCORI form.  Contact the BPS 
Office of Human Capital (OHC) for CORI check and 
confirmation support. The principal/head of school and the 
lead chaperone are responsible for submitting authorization 
forms to OHC and must not allow chaperones to take part in 
activities until they have been CORI/SORI cleared. Non-BPS 
employees who chaperone on a field trip are not covered for 
liability by the Boston Public Schools. The program leader 
must be sure that all chaperones, including non-BPS 
chaperones, are familiar with the BPS Code of Conduct and 
other district and school-based rules. Non-BPS employee 
chaperones (parents/guardians) are required to show proof 
of COVID vaccination, or a negative COVID-19 test within 72 
hours of the field trip.  
● BPS Parent Chaperones: Chaperones who are 
parents/guardians of BPS students on the trip must provide 
the same level of care and attention to ALL student 
participants. If a BPS chaperone’s child who does not attend 
the participating school must attend the program, the child 
must be a BPS student and in the same grade or age range 
as participating students. In this case, the BPS parent 
chaperone is responsible for incurring all costs associated 
with their child’s participation. 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 14 of 22 
 
All chaperones must complete the Chaperone Agreement 
form.  
● Chaperone Ratios: The student-to-chaperone maximum 
ratios must be: 
o Day field trips: minimum of two chaperones  
o Grades K-5, 10:1 
o Grades 6 and up, 10:1 
o Domestic Overnight field trips: 10:1 (minimum of 
two chaperones) 
o International field trips: 7:1 (minimum of two 
chaperones) * Includes Puerto Rico 
NOTE: There should not be more chaperones than 
students, unless mandated by an educational plan or 
other circumstances approved by the principal/head 
of school and Department of Global Education. For 
students with disabilities, the ratio of staff to 
students must be at least the same as the ratio 
mandated in their IEPs for their classes. 
o NEW: Tour guides and employees of third-party 
vendors contracted to help operate the trip are 
not considered chaperones and do not factor into 
the student to chaperone ratio.  
PERMISSION FORMS  
● The student may not attend the field trip without a signed 
permission slip. Permission for field trips must be in written 
form only. Program leaders are responsible for seeing that 
permission slips are filled out completely and signed by the 
legal parent(s)/guardian(s). 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 15 of 22 
 
● Permission slips are legal documents and may not be 
altered. Permission slips must be used for any excursion that 
is school sponsored, including those scheduled after school 
and on weekends. 
● No staff member may solicit students for any privately 
arranged field trip or excursion without the permission of 
the principal/head of school. 
● “Blanket” authorization (i.e., parental/guardian approval 
using a single form for multiple trips to be taken during the 
school year) should never be allowed (except for the 
Walking Trips and Water Activities form if they are in the 
same location). A separate parent/guardian permission slip 
must be obtained and filed for each field trip.  
● Parental/guardian permission slips must be sent home in 
English and in the language of the home.  
● Only parents/guardians are authorized to sign permission 
forms. For questions regarding legal guardianship, refer to 
the SIS site or the local Welcome Center. 
● Check that students and their parents/guardians have 
signed the BPS Media Appearances release section of the 
Parent/Student Agreement document so that the trip may 
be showcased upon your return. (This document can be 
found in the Guide to the Boston Public Schools for Families 
and Students.) 
● Review each student's Emergency Information Card (Form 
460 or electronic equivalent) to ensure/cross-check 
accuracy of all field trip permissions and forms. 
● Program leaders must be specific when completing the 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 16 of 22 
 
school portion of the Parental Authorization for Field Trip 
form. Parents/guardians must be given sufficient 
information to understand the nature and scope of the 
activities on the itinerary. Additional customized waivers 
may be developed for specific trips/itineraries. 
RECORD KEEPING FOR ALL TYPES OF TRIPS 
● Retain completed field trip request forms, original 
permission slips, medical forms, fire prevention and safety 
forms (if applicable), and all other signed documents for 
field trips in the school office. Legally, these records must be 
kept for the current fiscal year plus three additional years 
after all field trips have occurred. 
 
 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 17 of 22 
 
TRANSPORTATION FOR FIELD TRIPS 
● School buses or BPS approved transportation vendors’ 
vehicles (per BPS Transportation Department) MUST be 
used to transport students to and from field trips or athletic 
events regardless of how the trip is paid for. Privately owned 
vehicles, vehicles from non-approved vendors are not 
permitted.  
Ride sharing transportation services, such as Uber and Lyft, or 
leased vans are not to be utilized to transport students to 
and from field trips or athletic events, except in the case of a 
bona fide emergency.  
● Students are prohibited from driving vehicles, operating, or 
being a passenger on any motorbike during a field trip. 
● Staff are not permitted to transport students. Staff who 
utilize their own vehicles, or leased vehicles, risk being 
legally liable if students are injured while riding in their 
automobiles. 
● Please refer to Superintendent’s Circular TRN-03 for 
information and regulations regarding field trip 
transportation. 
SAFETY GUIDELINES  
As part of trip planning and itinerary development, ensuring the 
major aspects of health, safety, and security have been addressed 
with appropriate due diligence. Program leaders should be able 
to articulate in an informed manner what decisions were made, 
why they were made, and the sources that informed their 
decision making. If you are unsure as to whether an activity is 
appropriate in terms of safety or educational content for a 
school-sponsored trip, please consult with your principal/head of 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 18 of 22 
 
school and the Department of Global Education. 
● Review Superintendent’s Circular FSE-05, Medical 
Emergency Management, and SAF-04 Incident Data-
Reporting and Release for important safety protocols.  
● Do not leave students alone. Students should be 
accompanied by chaperones unless part of a scheduled 
activity in which parents have been informed of and 
approved in writing in advance, and age appropriate. 
However, if unaccompanied as part of a scheduled and 
structured activity, students should at least be in groups of 
three, AND always know how to reach an adult chaperone. 
● Day and water field trips: The Department of Safety Services 
(617-635-8000) must be notified in the event of a serious 
medical or other emergency and should be used as a 
resource for questions regarding safety on day field trips, 
including water activity day trips. 
● Domestic overnight trips: The principal/head of school is the 
emergency contact and must be notified in the event of a 
serious medical or other emergency. Prior to departure, the 
Department of Global Education should be used as a 
resource for questions regarding safety on trips, and for 
support with insurance and claims. Prior to departure, 
program leaders will receive emergency contact 
information. 
● International trips: The principal/head of school or designee, 
followed by the Department of Global Education or district 
appointee, are the emergency contacts for international 
trips. DGE must be notified in the event of a serious medical 
or other emergency and should be used as a resource for 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 19 of 22 
 
questions regarding safety on trips. Prior to departure, 
program leaders will receive emergency contact 
information. 
● Emergency Action Plan: At all times during the trip, all 
chaperones must carry with them a copy of the Emergency 
Action Plan (EAP) that outlines procedures for calling 911 in 
the US or the foreign equivalent while abroad, as well as 
emergency protocols. The EAP can be found in the day, 
overnight, and international circulars.  
● Personal Health: For overnight and international trips, 
students and staff must have had a recent doctor’s visit, 
physical exam, and any required vaccinations prior to 
departure. See CAO-24 and CAO-25 for details on healthy 
travel requirements. 
● Training: The district reserves the right to require additional 
training and/or certifications such as CPR/AED, first aid, and 
program (chaperone) leader risk management training 
depending on the type, location, and purpose of the trip. 
Review the specific circular for your trip type for certification 
requirements.  
● Phone/Social Media Usage: Set expectations with students 
regarding phone and social media usage during any field 
trip. This is especially critical during an emergency. 
● Insurance: The district provides medical insurance coverage 
for BPS-sponsored international and domestic trips for BPS 
students and BPS staff participants. [Domestic is defined as 
100 driven miles away from home or place of study or 
employment.] Trip cancellation and interruption coverage 
are not provided by the district. Program leaders must 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 20 of 22 
 
inform families (and funders) of this fact, and that they have 
the option to voluntarily purchase these additional 
coverages on their own. For Level 2 CDC or State 
Department Warning international destinations, trip 
cancellation and interruption coverages are strongly 
recommended.  
● Cancellation: The superintendent reserves the right to 
cancel any field trip up to and including the day of 
departure to manage risk. Upon advance review of 
itineraries, BPS reserves the right to deny schools 
permission to participate in the field trip activities on their 
itinerary where the risks of the activity outweigh the 
intended learning outcomes of the program. 
● Post Field Trip: After the trip, follow up and communicate 
with the student and parent/guardian, as well as the 
principal/head of school, Department of Safety Services, or 
the Department of Global Education if there are any student 
safety concerns (health or otherwise) during the trip that 
require further attention. 
HOMESTAYS IN BOSTON, NATIONALLY, AND ABROAD  
● For host family stays (both incoming and outgoing), review 
CAO-26 Guidelines for Homestays & International Student 
Visitors for more information. Please contact the 
Department of Global Education immediately for guidelines. 
All BPS families (anyone in households 18 or over) who host 
national or international guests must be CORI cleared by the 
BPS Office of Human Capital.  
INTERNATIONAL STUDENT VISITORS (CAO-26)  
● International/ students can register with BPS if they will be a 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 21 of 22 
 
full-time student at a BPS school, except the exam schools, 
for one year. Students must be in their freshman, 
sophomore, or junior year. Please be advised that BPS does 
not get involved with the J1 visa process. Review CAO-26 
Guidelines for Homestays & International Student Visitors for 
more information. Please contact the Department of Global 
Education immediately for guidelines. 
● For visiting students, note immunization requirements for 
those visiting us from abroad. Work with the program leader 
(lead chaperone) from visiting schools to ensure all health 
regulations are met. See attached letter for directives from 
the Massachusetts Department of Public Health. 
http://www.mass.gov/eohhs/docs/dph/cdc/immunization/im
munization-requirements-exchange-and-visiting-
students.pdf 
WATER ACTIVITIES (CAO-27)  
● If your trip involves activities in, or on the water, you must 
contact the Department of Global Education immediately to 
submit a mandatory Water Activity Request form and to 
ensure that the site location for the water activity has up-to-
date insurance, liability, and certification documentation on 
file with the district. Refer to CAO-27 for specific guidelines 
for water activities.  
For more information, questions, and support about this 
circular, please contact: 
 Owner: 
Chief of Teaching and Learning 
Title: 
Director of Global Education 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
315-601-0292 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 
Page 22 of 22 
 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


