Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-01 
Version 01 
 
PROMOTION POLICY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
Boston Public Schools students are the leaders, scholars, 
entrepreneurs, advocates, and innovators of tomorrow. BPS will 
ensure that 100% of those students are ready for college, career, 
and life. We will ensure that every graduate: 
● is a proficient reader, communicator, problem-solver, and 
critical thinker; 
● demonstrates the habits of mind and work required for 
success in school and the world of work; 
● knows how to acquire knowledge, connect it to familiar 
concepts and prior knowledge, and apply it, using 
sophisticated technologies; 
● has mastered key skills and understands important 
concepts from English Language Arts, Mathematics, Science 
and Technology, History and Social Science, at least one 
World Language, the Arts, Health, and Physical Education; 
● has applied these concepts in real-life contexts; and 
● has made a valued contribution to the school and 
community. 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
 
These expectations frame the teaching, learning, and assessment 
process. They are critical to lifelong learning and essential to 
gaining students’ commitment to the learning process.   
 
RESPONSIBILITIES AND ACCOUNTABILITY 
Every teacher, administrator, parent, and adult involved in the 
lives of our students share in the responsibility to ensure that all 
students meet these expectations.   
The Boston Public Schools:  
Schools, and the adults who work in them, are accountable for 
ensuring every student learns in an environment that is safe, 
welcoming, and sustaining; receives quality instruction that is 
responsive to their strengths and needs; and receives timely 
information about their progress. 
Families and Students: 
Families are responsible for ensuring their children come to 
school each day, on time, ready to learn.  Every student is also 
responsible for coming to school and class prepared and on time, 
working hard, and contributing to the school environment in a 
positive, responsible manner. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
 
THE BPS PROMOTION POLICY 
This promotion policy has been developed in alignment with the 
BPS Opportunity and Achievement Gap Policy which states in its 
preamble: “Every child, in every classroom, in every school of the 
Boston Public School system has the same opportunity to 
achieve the greatness within them as anybody else. Every child 
has the same unfettered access to every conceivable tool to 
unlock the greatness within them.” The BPS Promotion Policy 
outlines the expectations for school teams that ensure that 
students have access to every conceivable tool that will support 
them to meet grade-level learning expectations before 
considering the possibility of retention.  
BPS school teams and individual educators must provide all 
students with access to high-quality, differentiated, and relevant 
tier 1 instruction that is aligned with grade-level standards and 
implemented through high-quality materials. School teams and 
individual educators must monitor student progress towards 
grade-level expectations through formal and informal data 
collection and make ongoing adjustments to instruction to 
respond to evidence of student learning. School teams and 
individual educators must ensure that all students have access to 
tiered supports that provide appropriate scaffolds and instruction 
so that students are able to develop grade-level knowledge and 
skills.  
In cases where it is determined that a student may not, with all 
available supports provided, develop the necessary grade-level 
knowledge and skills by the end of the school year, a school 
team, including the student, family, teachers, and the school 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
 
leader, will collectively make decisions regarding student 
promotion. If the team is unable to come to a decision or any 
member would like to dispute a decision, the Chief of Teaching 
and Learning may be brought in to support the decision-making 
process. Principals and heads of school have the final authority 
for all promotion decisions. School teams must make decisions 
based on the following principles: 
● ensure promotions are earned and based on academic 
achievement 
● diminish grade retentions to the greatest extent possible 
● ensure students will enter classrooms with the skill and 
knowledge necessary to do grade-level work or have the 
necessary supports to accelerate learning 
● ensure students are prepared to demonstrate proficiency on 
the Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessments 
● establish a process that supports students and demands 
hard work from them 
● recognize that students learn at different rates and call for 
organizational structures that respond to students’ 
differences 
● define those inputs and outcomes for which teachers, 
administrators, parents, and students are accountable. 
 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
 
PROMOTION REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL GRADES 
Students must fulfill several requirements to be promoted to the 
next grade. All students must earn passing grades in core 
academic courses and maintain good attendance. Schools may 
establish promotion requirements that exceed those listed. The 
School Site Council must approve these additional requirements. 
High school students must pass courses that align to the BPS 
Graduation Policy (CAO-07) in order to earn the credits necessary 
to graduate. 
 
ENGLISH LEARNERS 
Students in programs for English learners must meet promotion 
and graduation requirements. However, EL students may not be 
retained in grade if the only reason for not passing the required 
tests is a lack of language knowledge.  
 
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES 
Students with disabilities are expected to meet promotion and 
graduation requirements. A student’s Individualized Education 
Program (IEP) or Section 504 plan will describe the conditions 
under which the student will take standardized tests for each 
subject scheduled for assessment or if the student requires an 
alternate assessment. Alternate assessments are intended for a 
minimal number of students with significant disabilities who are 
unable to take standard MCAS tests, even with accommodations. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
 
A student’s 504 plan will describe what, if any, testing 
accommodation will be needed. 
 
REQUIRED PROCESS 
Principals and heads of school are responsible for effectively 
implementing the following process: 
1. Parents must be notified by the end of September of the name 
and phone number of the school staff member (in addition to 
their child’s teachers) they should call about concerns related 
to their child’s academic progress. Parents should also be 
informed that if they ever have a concern about their child’s 
academic progress, they should notify the appropriate teacher 
and principal/head of school (or the designated administrative 
liaison to parents). 
 
2. If by mid-October, a teacher considers a student at-risk of not 
meeting the subject or grade-level standards, the teacher will 
notify the parent immediately, in writing, and refer the student 
to the appropriate administrator, guidance counselor, or 
student support services personnel.   
 
3. When a student has been identified as at-risk of not meeting 
subject or grade-level standards, the principal/head of school, 
teacher(s), and other designated staff will work with parents 
and the student to resolve any problems. They may consider a 
variety of options, including:    


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
 
● tiered academic or social emotional supports 
● examining and altering current instructional strategies or 
materials 
● tutoring (during or after school) 
● a change in schedule 
● a change in teacher 
● referral to other support, social service, or health-related 
services 
● problem-solving with other students or individuals who may 
have an impact on the students’ achievement. 
 
4. If by the close of the first marking term, the problem persists 
and the student remains at-risk for retention, additional 
options will be considered, including: 
● referral to the school’s Student Success Team (SST) 
● referral to safety net or alternative programs for more 
intensive services 
● access to additional instructional time (during the day, 
extended day, or summer school) 
● referral to special education, where necessary and 
appropriate, to determine evidence of a disability (pre-
referral documentation must provide evidence that other 
interventions have been attempted). 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
 
Parents will be engaged in consideration of additional 
intervention strategies and will be informed, in writing, of any 
decisions that result. Parents may request a referral for special 
education services in any case. The final determination of 
appropriate services will rest with the appropriate (IEP or 
Section 504) team. 
 
5. Only when all other interventions have been unsuccessful and 
the student has not made sufficient academic progress during 
the course of a school year will the student be considered for 
retention. All potential retentions will be reviewed by a 
Promotion Review Team, including the principal/head of 
school (or designee), a guidance counselor or student support 
team member, at least one of the student’s teachers, and the 
child’s parent.   
 
6. The review team will include the liaison teacher for any 
student with an IEP, and a bilingual teacher, counselor, or 
administrator for any student enrolled in a transitional 
bilingual program.  
 
7. By the end of January, formal, written notices must be sent to 
parents of students who remain at risk of being retained. The 
Promotion Review Team will meet in February and again 
before the end of the year to review and make decisions on 
students who are at risk of being retained. Principals and 
heads of school have the final authority for all promotion 
decisions.   
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
 
8. During the period from February through June, schools must 
maintain written, bimonthly contact with parents who were 
sent formal, written notices to apprise them of their child’s 
progress.  Copies of these notifications must be kept on file. 
 
9. Any student who is retained, or remains at-risk even though 
they were promoted, will be provided with additional support, 
including tutoring during the subsequent school year. 
 
HOME-SCHOOL PARTNERSHIPS 
The success of many students receiving transition support 
depends on the engagement of their parent(s) in their education. 
Schools implement a variety of strategies to help parents 
become successful partners in their children's development. 
These efforts are coordinated by the school’s guidance and other 
support staff. 
 
CONNECTIONS TO COMMUNITY RESOURCES 
Schools will collaborate with community agencies, community 
schools, and higher education institutions to support students' 
overall literacy and math development, increase volunteer 
involvement in schools, and diminish the many health, social, and 
emotional problems that undermine success in school. These 
efforts are supported by the school’s guidance and other support 
staff. 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-01 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Teaching and Learning 
Department: 
Office of Teaching & Learning 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9000 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


