Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-07 
Version 01 
 
 
 
MASSCORE GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Boston Public Schools (BPS) has a priority to create policies and 
practices that support the preparation of every student to be 
college, career, and life ready while removing barriers that 
prevent students from graduating from BPS. Accordingly, it is 
imperative that BPS utilize standards-aligned graduation 
requirements across the district that will promote and ensure 
rigor and excellence in our schools, resulting in the elimination of 
opportunity and achievement gaps and ensuring that every 
student graduates prepared for life after high school.  
Approved by the Boston School Committee in May of 2021, 
Boston Public Schools (BPS) adopted the MassCore Course of 
Study as its graduation requirement for all students in the 
district. The requirements will begin for students entering 9th 
grade in School Year 2022-2023 (SY22-23), with full 
implementation by the start of SY25-26. This circular outlines the 
details of graduation course requirements, alignment to DESE 
standards and state graduation requirements, and the course 
waiver process. 
GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 
Beginning with grade 9 in SY23-24, the following credits in 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-07 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 
various content categories are required for graduation from BPS. 
The table below visually represents the course requirements for 
graduation:  
MassCore Framework 
Massachusetts High School Program of Studies 
Content 
Category 
Units 
Notes 
English 
Language Arts 
4 Units 
ESL courses for students designated as ELD 1, 2 
or 3 will count toward ELA credits 
Mathematics 
4 Units 
Including completion of Algebra II or 
Integrated Mathematics III. A mathematics 
course during senior year is recommended for 
all students.  
Science 
3 Units 
of lab-
based 
science 
Coursework in technology/engineering courses 
may also count for MassCore science credit.  
History and 
Social Science 
3 Units 
Including U.S. History and World History and 
one additional core or MassCore elective. 
 
Inclusion of an Ethnic Studies course is strongly 
encouraged. 
Foreign 
Language 
2 Units 
Both units must be in the same language. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-07 
Page 3 of 6 
 
 
Physical 
Education 
1 unit, as 
required 
by law 
Students will have one quarter course (or its 
equivalent) of PE per year or an equivalent.  
 
Arts 
1 Unit 
Students will have one quarter course (or its 
equivalent) of Art per year or a cumulative unit.  
Additional 
Core Courses 
5 Units 
Inclusive of PE (1 credit) plus four additional 
courses. Other additional coursework 
(including Health Education* & Career and 
Technical Education) or any of the above. 
*Health Education: The BPS Wellness Policy requires 1 semester 
(at least ¼ course equivalent) of Health Education in high 
school. 
STATE GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 
The policy does not and will not replace state laws and DESE 
regulations pertaining to high school graduation. These 
additional requirements include, but are not limited to: 
• Action Civics Projects required by Chapter 296 of the Acts of 
2018, An Act to promote and enhance civic engagement. 
• Earning a “competency determination” [passing scores on 
the Grade 10 English language arts and mathematics and 
high school level science and technology/engineering 
Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS) 
tests]. For students who do not pass an MCAS test, 
educators develop an Educational Proficiency Plan (EPP) for 
the subject(s). Students need to meet course requirements 
for their EPP in addition to meeting MassCore requirements. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-07 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 
SUBSTITUTIONS 
The following substitutions may be used to meet graduation 
requirements without an additional waiver: 
Physical Education 
MassCore reflects the legal requirement that physical education 
be taught as a required subject in all grades. The BPS Wellness 
Policy requires all schools to offer high quality physical education 
for students in all grades. Under some circumstances, students 
can meet the requirement through an approved organized 
program of instructional physical activity, including but not 
limited to: participation in interscholastic athletics, skating, 
hockey, dance, yoga, martial arts, capoeira, or swimming; and any 
physical activity through school based or community programs, 
or independent study. Substitutions and independent study 
opportunities must be approved by the Office of Health and 
Wellness.  
Computer Science 
Students may substitute one unit of Computer Science (AP 
Computer Science Principles, Computer Science Principles, or 
Exploring Computer Science) that includes rigorous 
mathematical concepts and aligns with the Digital Literacy and 
Computer Science standards for a mathematics course.  
Humanities Course 
Double-blocked Humanities courses may count toward 1 ELA 
credit and 1 History credit. One period Humanities courses count 
as 1 History credit and cannot be used toward ELA credit.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-07 
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
Career and Technical Education 
Students enrolled in a DESE approved Chapter 74 program can 
fulfill MassCore requirements without fulfilling arts and world 
language requirements. While arts and world language 
requirements may be waived, students are strongly encouraged 
to take these courses to comply with college admission 
requirements.  
Credit for Courses in Grades 7 and 8 
Students will be able to apply high school credits for high school 
level courses completed successfully in 7th or 8th grade. 
World Language Competency  
Multilingual learners may earn up to two World Language credits 
for demonstrated competency in their native language by 
achieving Intermediate Mid Level of language proficiency on the 
AVANT Stamp Assessment. The AVANT Stamp administration will 
be administered at the BPS Welcome Center in the fall and 
spring of each year. Students scoring at the Intermediate High 
Level of language proficiency can utilize the assessment results 
towards attainment of the MA State Seal of Biliteracy upon 
graduation if they also meet the minimum criteria for English 
language proficiency set forth by the Massachusetts Department 
of Elementary and Secondary Education.  
Course Waiver Process 
Schools may seek additional waivers for individual students or 
courses.  
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-07 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION 
• Each school will collaborate with the Academics team on 
ensuring alignment of its course schedule with MassCore 
requirements. 
• All 9th grade students should follow the recommended 
course sequence and must take at least a quarter of physical 
education in SY23-24. 
• Schools should work with districts on ensuring they have 
the proper staffing model to meet MassCore requirements, 
especially for students in grade 9.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Elementary Superintendent 
Department: 
Academics and Professional Learning 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-6053 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


