Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
CAO-24 
Version 01 
 
 
OVERNIGHT FIELD TRIP GUIDELINES 
 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
 
IMPORTANT NOTE: These guidelines might be impacted by COVID-19 
restrictions and are subject to change based on public health, 
international security, or other emergent issues that could impact travel. 
For the most up-to-date information and guidance, contact 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org for assistance/guidance.  
 
 
This Superintendent’s Circular provides instructions for 
implementing the Field Trip Policy passed by the Boston School 
Committee on November 20, 2019. 
This circular should be read AFTER the Superintendent’s Circular 
No. CAO-22, General Guidelines and Procedures for All Field Trips 
as additional guidelines are outlined there. 
The principal/head of school and/or the district department 
sponsoring the trip are responsible for ensuring that all field trip 
policies and procedures as outlined in this circular are adhered 
to. 
Together, the principal/head of school and/or the district 
department lead sponsoring the trip and the program leader 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 2 of 80 
 
 
must review and complete checklists for this circular. Signed 
checklists must be kept on file at the school/district department. 
OVERNIGHT FIELD TRIP: Any domestic trip off school grounds that 
involves students’ participation overnight. 
● Overnight Field Trip forms are submitted to the 
principal/head of school AT LEAST 12 weeks in advance and 
approved by the principal/head of school. 
● All forms, including the signed CAO-24 checklist form, are 
filed at the school. 
● Overnight Field Trip Request form, the list of student names, 
emergency contact name and number, grade, D.O.B, the list 
of chaperone names and their role in the school community, 
the itinerary, and if applicable, train and flight information 
are sent to the district to notify the district of trip plans AT 
LEAST 4 weeks in advance. Scan and email the Overnight 
Field Trip Request form and information to the appropriate 
principal/ leader as well as to the Department of Global 
Education. Please follow up to ensure documentation has 
been received. 
 
OVERNIGHT FIELD TRIP CHECKLIST 
 Review Superintendent’s Circular No. CAO-22, General 
Guidelines and Procedures for All Field Trips. 
 All field trip IDEAS must be preliminarily approved in writing 
by the principal/head of school or District Department 
sponsoring the trip prior to the distribution of any 
informational materials on the proposed trip to students 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 3 of 80 
 
 
and their parents/guardians and prior to any fundraising or 
other detailed preparations. Consult with the principal/head 
of school on potential chaperones and student recruitment. 
 Review Superintendent’s Circular FSE-05 Medical 
Emergency Management and SAF-04 Incident Data 
Reporting and Release for important safety protocols. The 
Department of Global Education should be used as a 
resource for questions regarding risk management on 
overnight field trips. 
 Select a site and investigate the appropriateness of the site 
in relation to the category of field trip. 
 Select a date and an alternate date. Note: Check with the 
principal/head of school, teachers, and staff to ensure that 
trips are not scheduled on dates that interfere with 
important tests, religious holidays, or class work. 
 
PLANNING PROCESS 
For thorough planning and to maximize affordability and 
fundraising efforts, it is recommended that overnight trips are 
planned at least six months in advance. 
 
ROLE OF THE PROGRAM LEADER (LEAD CHAPERONE) 
Program Leader Description: The program leader is a BPS 
employee and the lead chaperone organizing and leading the 
trip. All program leaders (lead chaperones and the BPS employee 
organizing and leading the trip) and chaperones must be 
approved by the principal/head of school or district department 
sponsoring the trip. The program leader is responsible for 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 4 of 80 
 
 
ensuring all guidelines in CAO-22 and CAO-24 are followed and 
keeping the principal/head of school and the district informed of 
trip developments. The program leader is responsible for 
completing the Overnight Field Trip Request form and 
accompanying documents that are submitted to the 
principal/head of school for approval. The program leader is also 
responsible for organizing the chaperone team, student team, 
and pre-departure meetings. 
 School Nurse and Guidance Counselor Consultation: Before 
approval of a field trip, the program leader must consult 
with the school leader to determine if, and what type of 
medical assistance is needed for participating students. To 
ensure accessibility, this step is crucial, and must take place 
before the field trip is secured. For additional questions, 
please consult the Health Services Department. Additionally, 
to thoroughly support a student's participation in a field trip, 
consult with and, when necessary, receive training from the 
school nurse regarding any students who have medical 
needs at least six weeks before departure (much longer for 
international and overnight field trip programs). Also consult 
with the school counselor regarding mental and behavioral 
health needs. If any student has a serious medical or mental 
health condition, be sure that their doctor is aware of the 
essential participation criteria and location of the trip and 
writes a letter indicating that the child may safely attend 
and participate in trip activities. Keep this document on file 
with other key permissions slips and medical forms. 
 Overnight Field Trip Form: Complete and submit an 
Overnight Field Trip Request form and accompanying 
documents to obtain official consent from the 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 5 of 80 
 
 
principal/head of school to execute the trip. Once the 
principal/head of school has approved the trip, you must 
send a copy of the request, itinerary, and supporting 
documents to the Department of Global Education. 
 Mindset: Planning, organization, and preparation are critical 
to a successful experience for all participants. As part of trip 
planning and itinerary development, ensure the major 
aspects of health, safety, student inclusion, and security 
have been addressed with due diligence. Program leaders 
must be able to articulate in an informed manner what 
decisions were made, why they were made, and the sources 
that informed that decision making. If you have questions 
about the appropriateness of an activity, please consult with 
your principal/head of school and the Department of Global 
Education. 
 School File: Create a school file to house all important 
documents: Overnight Field Trip Request form and 
attachments, student roster, student permission slips, and 
medical forms, and other signed documents including 
incident reports, incident log, and the fire safety plan. These 
documents must be kept on file for the current fiscal year 
plus three additional years after the trip has occurred. 
 Communication: Share the trip details listed below with all 
teachers, nurses, and other staff members so that they may 
plan accordingly. 
o Trip overview (purpose) 
o Destination 
o Date of trip 
o Students’ names 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 6 of 80 
 
 
o Chaperones’ names and roles in school community 
 Documentation: Prepare and distribute the Parental 
Authorization for Overnight Field Trip form, Medical 
Information form, Student Traveler Behavior Contract, 
Student Support for Overnight Programs, and the 
Medication Administration form to each participating 
student and chaperone. For preparedness and safety, you 
also must have these medical forms from chaperones. If 
applicable, prepare and distribute the Notarized 
Parent/Guardian Airline Travel Consent form. (Some airlines 
and travel companies require this; some do not. Research 
your particular trip to see if this applies.) 
 Meetings: Conduct AT LEAST TWO pre-departure student 
meetings. Discuss the trip’s educational purpose and goals, 
conduct expectations, itinerary, healthy travel, and all other 
logistics of the program. (For lengthy overnight programs, 
see CAO-25 for additional student meeting topics.) Conduct 
AT LEAST ONE parent/guardian meeting (with each family 
or all families together) to review the purpose of the trip, 
itinerary, review/sign permission forms, review logistics of 
travel, and share medical and safety information. 
Please note: Plan for families who may need translation 
services at the meeting; students should not serve as their 
parent/guardian’s translator at this meeting. If a 
parent/guardian is unable to attend the meeting, a 
chaperone (a BPS employee) must be sure to speak to the 
parent/guardian via telephone or in-person about the trip 
prior to taking the student on an overnight trip. Document 
this personal contact for your records. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 7 of 80 
 
 
SAFETY PREPAREDNESS 
 Travel Advisories/Warnings: The head of school and 
superintendent reserve the right to cancel any field trip up 
to and including the day of departure to manage risk. 
 Insurance: Through On Call International insurance, the 
district provides medical coverage for international and 
domestic BPS-sponsored trips (domestic being 100 driven 
miles away from home or place of study or employment) for 
BPS students, BPS staff participants, and chaperones. On 
Call will serve as the primary source for medical insurance. 
However, in some cases, if a hospital visit is required, 
students may be required to pay out of pocket, and be 
reimbursed by On Call later. Families will want to budget for 
this just-in-case expense. The On Call insurance policy does 
NOT include cancellation or trip interruption insurance 
should the trip be canceled or interrupted for any reason 
other than medical. Cancellation/interruption must be due 
to the traveler getting sick, injured, or someone in the 
traveler’s immediate family being sick, injured, or death. 
Students/families would need to show proof of a 
sickness/injury; and the sickness/injury must be so disabling 
as to cause them to cancel/interrupt their trip. If there is a 
sickness/death for their family member, they would need to 
show proof of that, too. Save all receipts for flights/lodging 
for reimbursement purposes and a claim form would need 
to be filled out. Families will need to know in advance that 
Trip Cancellation has a $2,000 limit, and Trip Interruption 
has a $2,500 limit. Again, the superintendent reserves the 
right to cancel a trip for any reason and at any time for 
safety purposes; Cancel for Any Reason Insurance (CFAR) is 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 8 of 80 
 
 
NOT provided by the district. Therefore, all trip participants 
must purchase their own (CFAR) insurance to protect their 
trip investment. 
 Training: It is recommended that at least two chaperones 
(including the program leader) hold valid CPR AND first aid 
certification. First Aid: Ensure the availability of a first aid kit. 
Verify emergency and medical information and contact 
details. 
 Chaperone Ratios: For overnight trips, the student-to- 
chaperone ratio is 7:1, with a two-chaperone minimum. It is 
recommended that a chaperone reserve, or backup, be 
identified in the event a chaperone is no longer able to 
participate at the last minute or must leave the field. Tour 
guides, or employees of third-party vendors contracted to 
help operate the trip, are not considered chaperones, and 
do not factor into the student to chaperone ratio. 
 Transportation: School buses or BPS-approved 
transportation vendors’ vehicles MUST be used to transport 
students to and from field trips or athletic events, regardless 
of how the trip is paid for. Privately owned vehicles, vehicles 
from non-approved vendors, ride-sharing transportation 
services such as Uber and Lyft, or leased vans are not to be 
utilized to transport students to and from field trips or 
athletic events, except in the case of a bona fide emergency. 
Refer to TRN-03 and CAO-22 for information and regulations 
on field trip transportation. 
 Water Activities: If your trip involves any activities in or on 
the water, you must contact the Department of Global 
Education for approval at least 16 weeks in advance. There is 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 9 of 80 
 
 
a separate and mandatory procedure for all trips involving 
water. Please review CAO-27 and contact the Department of 
Global Education immediately. 
 Healthy Travelers: Be sure students have had a recent 
(current school year) doctor’s visit and physical exam prior to 
departure. Students and staff should be current on all 
immunizations and vaccinations, including those related to 
the location they will be traveling to. Travelers should 
consult with their primary care doctor and can also visit the 
Center for Disease Control’s website for information on 
staying healthy while traveling at 
http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/. If any student has a serious 
medical condition, please be sure that their doctor writes a 
letter indicating that the child may safely attend and 
participate in trip activities. 
 
CHAPERONE CRITERIA 
 Chaperone Recruitment: Program leaders must consult 
with the principal/head of school on potential chaperones 
and student recruitment. The program leader (lead 
chaperone) must be a BPS employee. Other authorized 
chaperones may include parents and guardians who are 
required to be 21 years of age or older. Any parent on the trip 
must operate in the role of chaperone. All chaperones must 
be approved by the head of school/principal. Every effort 
should be made for students to have access to the field trip 
experience, for chaperones to be representative of the 
student group, and for chaperones to include males and 
females. The selection and approval of chaperones by the 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 10 of 80 
 
 
principal/head of school should be based on the individuals’ 
thorough knowledge of and rapport with most of the 
student participants. Choose a chaperone team purposefully 
and wisely, considering strengths. Every adult on the trip 
must be a chaperone and have a clear role. 
 Non-BPS Chaperones: Other authorized chaperones may 
include parents and volunteers who are required to be 21 
years of age or older. All non-BPS employee chaperones 
must submit a yearly CORI/SORI authorization form to the 
Office of Human Capital. Complete the eCORI form online. 
Contact the BPS Office of Human Capital (OHC) for CORI 
check and confirmation support. The principal/head of 
school and the lead chaperone are responsible for 
submitting authorization forms to OHC and must not allow 
chaperones to take part in activities until they have been 
CORI/SORI cleared. Non-BPS employees who chaperone on 
a field trip are not covered for liability by the Boston Public 
Schools. The program leader must be sure that all 
chaperones, including non-BPS chaperones, are familiar 
with the BPS Code of Conduct and other district and school- 
based rules. 
 BPS Parent Chaperones: Chaperones who are 
parents/guardians of BPS students on the trip must provide 
the same level of care and attention to ALL student 
participants. If a BPS chaperone’s child who does not attend 
the participating school must attend the program, the child 
must be a BPS student and in the same grade or age range 
as participating students. In this case, the BPS parent 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 11 of 80 
 
 
chaperone is responsible for incurring all costs associated 
with their child’s participation. 
● All chaperones must complete the Chaperone 
Agreement form. 
● Non-BPS employees who chaperone on a field trip are 
not covered for liability by the Boston Public Schools. 
● Refer to CAO-22 for additional chaperone criteria. 
 
STUDENT ACCESSIBILITY AND PARTICIPATION 
 Essential Criteria: The program leader and principal/head of 
school shall work together to establish essential 
participation criteria for the trip that informs students and 
parents of all activities and risks associated with each 
itinerary activity and trip location, to determine what 
accommodations or modifications may need to be made for 
the student to successfully and safely participate in all or 
portions of the trip. 
 Recruitment: Students not enrolled in the Boston Public 
Schools may not participate. Once on the field trip, student 
participants are not permitted to leave the group to visit 
friends, relatives etc., and rejoin the group. Students must 
remain with the group at all times. Field trips must be 
advertised to all students (within the whole school, 
particular grade, class/subject, club, or program associated 
with the trip), regardless of their financial situation. Schools 
shall make every reasonable effort to make instructional 
field trips affordable for all students. A student’s ability to 
pay may not be a criterion for field trip participation. Trips 
must be advertised to all students (within the school, 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 12 of 80 
 
 
particular grade, class, or program associated with the trip), 
regardless of their financial situation. 
 Accommodations: Students with English Learner status, 504 
plans, and/or IEPs cannot be denied access to field trips due 
to their status, or ability. It is the responsibility of the school 
to ensure that all accommodations normally provided to a 
student as indicated in their educational plans are made 
available during a field trip, including medication. See 
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-8 for information about 
medical dispensation on field trips. Participating students’ 
IEP or 504 plan shall be available to any staff coordinating 
and/or participating in the field trip. If any student has a 
serious medical, or mental health condition, please be sure 
that their doctor is aware of the essential participation 
criteria and location of the trip and writes a letter indicating 
that the child may safely attend and participate in trip 
activities. Keep this document on file with other key 
permissions slips and medical forms. 
 Inclusivity: Program leaders must consider their student 
demographics when selecting field trip locations, sites, and 
activities. Specifically determine the impact the locations, 
sites, and activities may have on diverse populations such as 
students of color, EL students, students who identify with 
the LGBTQ community, students with disabilities, those who 
may be in the minority during your field trip experience, and 
those students who belong to groups that have experienced 
marginalization in the location being visited. Program 
leaders must (1) work to prepare students for sensitive 
experiences, and (2) ensure that the program is safe and 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 13 of 80 
 
 
inclusive for all students. Consult the Department of Global 
Education for resources if needed. 
 Inclusive Rooming: The program leader and principal/head 
of school shall work with transgender and gender 
nonconforming students to provide accommodations 
(including rooming) that affirm the student’s gender 
identity while also ensuring safety. Program leaders should 
work with students and families to make sure all travel 
documents (airline tickets, passport) reflect their legal 
names as listed on government-issued identification, while 
all unofficial documents and materials may reflect the 
student’s preferred name. Please view additional rooming 
guidelines from the Office of Equity here. BPS students and 
parents are required to sign a BPS Student Traveler & Family 
Agreement form regarding student conduct while 
participating in a BPS sponsored field trip. Participation in 
field trips may be denied to any student who has 
demonstrated disregard for the policies and rules of BPS or 
the school prior to the field trip. Parents/guardians and 
students must be made aware of this policy in advance and 
communicated with throughout any processes involving 
their child not participating in a field trip. 
 Student Dismissal: Following an investigation, if the 
program leader, in consultation with the principal/head of 
school and Central Office staff, determines that a student’s 
conduct while on an overnight trip, poses a risk to 
themselves, or the safety of the group, or is no longer 
manageable by BPS staff in the field, the district reserves 
the right to request, and make arrangements for that 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 14 of 80 
 
 
student to return home. The district also reserves the right 
to request that families assume responsibility for all or a 
portion of the costs associated with their child’s return. 
Students may be subject to further disciplinary action and 
will be provided the opportunity to have a formal hearing at 
the school level upon return. The school must document the 
parent/guardian’s consent of this policy prior to the trip. 
If a student is to be dismissed from an overnight field trip, 
the student’s parent/guardian must be notified in advance 
and should agree to meet the student at the airport or other 
agreed-upon destination. If the parent/guardian is not 
reachable, the student’s principal or appropriate school- 
based point of contact must be notified and agree to meet 
the student at the airport or other agreed-upon destination. 
Students under the age of 16 must be accompanied on their 
flight by a chaperone. Students over the age of 16 may fly 
unaccompanied, though a chaperone must accompany the 
student to the airport to ensure the student checks in for 
their flight. (Age requirements may be subject to specific 
airline/train/bus guidelines.) Any costs assumed in this 
regard will be the responsibility of the parent/guardian. 
 Attendance: Provisions must be made in advance for any 
student not attending the trip and staying at school. If 
applicable, provide alternative arrangements and/or 
comparable activities for students not attending the trip or 
unable to participate in a portion of your trip. If a student’s 
family elects for their child not to attend a field trip for any 
reason, the child may not be penalized through their grade 
or otherwise. Attendance forms should indicate when a 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 15 of 80 
 
 
student is physically absent from the school building on a 
field trip but participating in a school-sponsored program 
being conducted off school grounds. (Note: It is important to 
know and document where students are at all times. 
 
PRE-DEPARTURE CONFIRMATION CHECK 
 
Eight Weeks (or More) Prior to Your Trip: 
 Develop transportation plans: mode of transportation, travel 
time, cost, etc. (If applicable, be sure to note how and with 
whom the child will travel to and from a field trip’s 
departure and pick-up locations.) 
 Review all students’ medical forms with the school nurse 
and school counselor to ensure all documents are 
completed, to support each student’s health during the trip. 
(Please note: nurses and counselors do not “clear” students 
for travel but will provide chaperones with guidance in 
supporting students while traveling.) Consult with and, 
when necessary, receive training from and obtain written 
comments from the school nurse and counselor regarding 
any students who have expressed medical needs (e.g., 
medication, asthma, allergies, etc.). 
 If your trip is less than 100 driving miles in distance, please 
ensure ALL students have valid medical insurance that 
covers them while on this program. Record details of 
insurance on the Medical Information Form. 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 16 of 80 
 
 
Five Weeks (or More) Prior to the Field Trip: 
 Contact the field trip site and ensure that the necessary 
arrangements are still in place. 
 Collect the completed and signed Parental Authorization for 
Overnight Trip, Medical Information, and Medication 
Administration forms from each participating student and 
chaperone and ensure that copies of all forms (and the 
itinerary) are submitted to the principal/head of school. 
* Contact the Department of Global Education for the 
Informed Consent Template to be tailored for your trip and 
then shared with families. 
 If necessary, collect the Notarized Parent/Guardian Airline 
Travel Consent form. 
 Hold a chaperone team meeting to distribute trip 
responsibilities and to review the student team. 
 Review students’ permission slips and medical forms; 
prepare any questions for follow-up with families and the 
school nurse. 
 The lead chaperone will record the names of the chaperones 
and whom each chaperone is supervising; each chaperone 
must carry this list. 
 Chaperones will organize a buddy system, pairing students 
with one another for safety purposes. 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 17 of 80 
 
 
 The lead chaperone will prepare trip binder for all 
chaperones (see During the Trip section which lists all 
binder contents). 
 Notify the appropriate principal leader and the Department 
of Global Education of your overnight travel plans by 
scanning and emailing the Overnight Field Trip Request 
Form at least four weeks in advance. 
 
Two Weeks (or More) Prior to the Field Trip: 
 If applicable, inform the food service manager or attendant 
of the names of the students going on the trip and the date 
and time of the field trip. 
 Verify all arrangements, including transportation and 
reception at the site. 
 Contact parents/guardians via telephone or in-person to 
review the final details of travel and verify emergency, 
medical and safety information, and contact details. Be sure 
families have copies of their child’s permission and medical 
forms as well as the trip itinerary and contact details. 
 Notify/consult with the principal/head of school (and 
Department of Global Education) if trip plans have changed 
from the original field trip request. 
 
COMMUNICATION PLAN 
 For Domestic Overnight Trips: The principal/head of school 
(or designee) is the emergency contact for program leaders 
and must be notified in the event of a serious medical 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 18 of 80 
 
 
emergency or other emergency event. The Department of 
Global Education should be used as a resource for questions 
regarding safety on trips, and for support with insurance 
support and claims. Prior to departure, program leaders will 
receive emergency contact information. 
 Phone Service Coverage: Program leaders must have cell 
phone coverage for the duration of the trip for 
communication with BPS and families in the event of an 
emergency. This cell phone must be on at all times so you 
may be contacted in case of an emergency. If this is not 
possible due to your location, please arrange a 
communication plan with the Department of Global 
Education. Program leaders must carry the phone numbers 
for the principal/head of school or sponsoring district 
department and the Department of Global Education. You 
are required to call anytime there is an emergency. 
 District Communication: Codify a clear communication plan 
with your principal/head of school or sponsoring district 
department prior to departure. You must check-in via phone 
call, text, or email upon arrival, every 48 hours, whenever the 
itinerary significantly changes, whenever you expect to lose 
cell/email coverage, upon departure, and upon safe return. 
You MUST check-in via phone when there is an incident. 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 19 of 80 
 
 
Definitions of communication types and expectations: 
Green Communication: No immediate concern. 
Program leader: notifies principal about arrival, departure, 
changes in itinerary, loss of connectivity, highlights of 
programs, photos. *Check in daily via text, phone call, email. 
Yellow Communication: A Yellow Call is a reportable 
situation or event, but no threat to life, limb, eyesight, or 
potential for severe emotional trauma. The incident is 
managed effectively in the field by program leader, but 
could devolve into a serious or critical incident, and requires 
attention from BPS on-call staff. 
Program leader: (1) notifies principal; (2) documents Incident 
SOAP Report; (3) monitors; (4) updates on-call BPS staff. 
Red Communication: Critical, violent, time-sensitive 
incident, illness, injury; or event that resulted in the loss of 
OR potential loss of life, limb, eyesight. 
Requires IMMEDIATE RESPONSE of program leader: 
(1) notifies principal; (2) alerts local medical assistance and/or 
law enforcement; (3) documents Incident SOAP Report; 
(4) monitors; (5) updates on-call BPS staff. 
 Communication with Families: Call students the night 
before travel to ensure transportation to the departure 
location is set, remind students to bring travel documents, 
and answer last-minute student and family questions. Set 
expectations regarding communication during travel 
between chaperones/student travelers, and the 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 20 of 80 
 
 
principal/families. Families must know who to call 24/7 in 
case of an emergency. 
 
DURING THE FIELD TRIP PROGRAM 
 On the day of the trip, take attendance and leave the current 
list of students attending the trip with the principal/head of 
school. If applicable, record a specific bus number and 
driver’s name and leave this information with the 
principal/head of school and share with all chaperones and, if 
age-appropriate, students. 
 Team Safety: If you believe conditions are unsafe, or 
unhealthy at any point on the trip, it is the program leader’s 
responsibility to make adjustments in the interest of 
group/individual safety. Consult your principal/head of 
school and the Department of Global Education during the 
trip when you have questions regarding trip safety. 
 Conduct Safety Reviews with Students in the Field: The 
following topics must be reviewed with students: 
 Program leaders conduct a fire and safety assessment 
and fire drill (Fire Prevention and Safety Instructions) 
when you arrive at EACH NEW accommodation. Share 
with the chaperone team the “Assessment” and 
prepare for orientation and fire drill. 
 Share evacuation plan and emergency plans: Discuss 
where students go during an emergency or otherwise? 
Discuss where students go if they are separated from 
the group during an activity. 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 21 of 80 
 
 
 Ensure students have a list of the key addresses 
(hotel/chaperone information) and emergency 
information as well as copies of all travel documents. 
Share where you are staying (room number if 
applicable) and how to reach you on the trip. 
 Conduct in-country orientation for conduct and 
cultural expectations. Set expectations for phone usage 
and social media. This is especially critical during an 
emergency. 
 Conduct safety orientations for service learning 
projects where teams work to construct, alter, and/or 
repair structures, including painting and decorating, 
and for agricultural projects, chaperones with the 
support of program providers, must conduct a safety 
orientation at the beginning of each activity. 
 
Student Debriefs/Reflections: 
 Conduct morning briefings to review the day’s itinerary 
and key information. Ask and answer questions. 
 Conduct afternoon and/or evening debriefings to 
review the next day’s itinerary, gather feedback, and 
process the day’s learning, and make any necessary 
adjustments. Engage students in conversations that 
help them process their experiences. Help them break 
down stereotypes so that when they return, they have 
a deeper understanding of the culture and country 
they visited. Draw connections to how they will take 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 22 of 80 
 
 
the experience home with them and how the lessons 
they have learned will translate back home. 
 
Check-Ins & Student Supervision: 
 Conduct frequent check-ins with the chaperone team 
to assess programming, student dynamics, and to 
make any adjustments. 
 Conduct frequent check-Ins with students about their 
behavioral and physical health as well as their ability to 
process their trip experiences. 
 Conduct nightly bed checks to be sure students are in 
their rooms at the designated time. If staying in a 
hotel/hostel be sure to request in advance for students 
to be placed near chaperones. 
 Establish a curfew with clear guidelines, and ensure 
doors are open if students congregate in the evening. 
Adults should stay close by and conduct frequent 
expected and unexpected room checks. Be mindful of 
romantic relationships amongst students. 
 Conduct regular and frequent headcounts and buddy 
checks throughout the day. Do not leave students 
alone. Students should be accompanied by chaperones 
unless part of a scheduled activity and age appropriate 
as approved by their parent/guardian in advance. 
However, if unaccompanied as part of a scheduled and 
structured activity, students should be in at least 


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 23 of 80 
 
 
groups of three AND always know how to reach an 
adult chaperone. 
 
DOCUMENTS TO TAKE 
All chaperones must carry a trip binder at all times (or have them 
very close at hand) that includes the following documents. The 
program leader carries the original forms; all other chaperones 
carry copies. 
● Permissions slips (updated based on contact 
verification done with families) 
● Medical Information Form and Medical Administration 
Form 
● Student & Family Conduct Agreement Form 
● Parental waivers (if applicable) 
● Notarized Airline Consent Form (if applicable) 
● Copies of passports, visas, resident cards, and other 
travel-related documents 
● Emergency Action Plan (EAP) 
● Insurance information 
● BPS Field Guide protocols with emergency phone 
numbers 
● Fire prevention and safety information 
● Incident Report (blank and/or completed) 
● Witness Report Form (blank and/or completed) 
● Incident Investigation Log (blank and/or completed) 


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 24 of 80 
 
 
● SOAP Note (blank and/or completed) 
● List of addresses and emergency contacts in-country 
for all travelers 
● Water Activities Forms if applicable 
● Program leaders carry originals of permission slips and 
medical forms; other chaperones carry copies. 
 
DOCUMENTS TO LEAVE FOR YOUR PRINCIPAL/HEAD OF 
SCHOOL 
● CAO-24 circular with checklists 
● Permissions slips (updated based on contact 
verification done with families) 
● Student & Family Conduct Agreement Form 
● Parental waivers (if applicable) 
● Medical Information Form and Medical Administration 
Form 
● Notarized Airline Consent Form (if applicable) 
● Copies of passports, visas, resident cards, and other 
travel-related documents 
● Emergency Action Plan (EAP) 
● Insurance information 
● Fire prevention and safety information 
● International Program Incident Report (blank for 
reference) 
● Water Activities Forms (if applicable) 


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 25 of 80 
 
 
AFTER THE FIELD TRIP (MANDATORY) 
Ensure all students safely return to their parents/families 
when you arrive back from the destination by following 
expectations set prior to the trip for student pick-up from 
arrival location. 
 Medical Follow-Up: Depending on travel location and 
prescribed travel medication, call all students and families 
after the trip to remind students to continue to take all 
prescribed travel medication. Additionally, remind students 
(inform parents/guardians) to see a doctor immediately if 
they are not feeling well after the trip and to inform the 
doctor of their recent travels. 
 Incident Reports: If applicable, file and follow up with an 
Incident Report. 
 
AFTER THE FIELD TRIP (SUGGESTED) 
 Write thank-you notes. 
 Present to school, family, and the community about the 
experience. 
 Conduct related creative and/or analytical projects to 
showcase student learning. 
 Write a news article about the trip for a local newspaper or 
website. 
 Email stories, journals, and pictures of your trip to the 
Department of Global Education. 


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 26 of 80 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Teaching and Learning 
Department: 
Department of Global Education  
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
315-601-0292 
Email: 
OPL@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
ATTACHMENTS: 
1. Overnight Field Trip Request Form 
2. Emergency Action Plan 
3. Parental Authorization for Overnight Field Trip 
4. Medical Information Form 
5. Medication Administration Form 
6. Notarized Parent/Guardian Airline Consent Form 
7. Overnight Programs Incident Report 
8. Overnight Programs Witness Report 
9. Overnight Programs Incident Log 
10. Fire Prevention and Safety Instructions 
11. BPS Student Traveler & Family Agreement Form 
12. BPS Chaperone Agreement Form 


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 27 of 80 
 
 
OVERNIGHT FIELD TRIP CHECKLIST 
Please sign this checklist, retain a copy for your file, and submit 
the original to the school office for filing. 
Your signature indicates that you read and understand the 
policies in this circular; that they have been/will be followed; and 
all checklists throughout the trip planning and the trip 
implementation process have been or will be completed. 
 
 
School Name:  
 
 
Program Leader:  
Date  
 
 
 
Signature of Principal/Head of School or 
Date 
Sponsoring District Department 


Page 28:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 28 of 80 
 
 
CAO- 24 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT FORM 
Please sign this checklist, retain a copy for your file, submit the 
original to the school office for filing and attach it to your 
completed request package. 
Your signature indicates that you read and understand the 
policies in this circular and that they have been/will be followed 
and all checklists throughout the trip planning and the trip 
implementation process have been or will be completed. 
 
 
School Name:  
 
 
 
 
 
Signature of program leader 
Date 
 
 
 
Signature of Principal/Head of School 
Date 
or Sponsoring District Department 


Page 29:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 29 of 80 
 
 
OVERNIGHT FIELD TRIP REQUEST FORM 
This form is submitted to the principal/head of school and is kept 
on file in the school office. In addition, notify the appropriate 
Network Superintendent and the Department of Global 
Education of your plans (four weeks in advance) by faxing or 
emailing as a PDF the following documents: 1) Overnight field 
Trip Request Form signed by the principal/head of school , 2) 
Day- by-Day trip itinerary, 3) Student roster; D.O.B, grade, 
emergency contact name, and number and 4) if applicable, your 
flight or train itinerary. Please call or email to ensure these 
documents have been received by all parties. 
 
SCHOOL INFORMATION: 
School:  
 
 
Date Submitted:  
 
 
 
TRIP OVERVIEW: 
Number of Students:  
Number of Chaperones:  
 
 
 
(Supervision: maximum ratio 10:1 with a two-chaperone 
minimum. For students with disabilities, the ratio of staff to 
students must be at least the same as the ratio mandated in 
their IEPs for their classes.) 


Page 30:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 30 of 80 
 
 
Field Trip Category: 
 
Destination:  
 
Dates of Trip:  
 
 
Overview of Trip (Educational Purpose): 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCOMMODATION/LODGING INFORMATION 
 
 
Accommodation Name:  
 
Address: 
 
Phone Number:  
 


Page 31:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 31 of 80 
 
 
PROGRAM PROVIDER INFORMATION 
(If working with a company, organization, or partner) 
 
Program Provider: 
 
Program Provider Contact Person:  
 
Program Provider Telephone Number:  
 
Program Email:  
 
 
ITINERARY 
Please attach the detailed day-by-day itinerary: 


Page 32:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 32 of 80 
 
 
PROGRAM LEADER: 
 
Program Leader/Lead Chaperone:  
 
 
Role in School:  
 
Program Leader Phone # (prior to the trip): 
 
Program Leader Phone # (during the trip):  
 
Program Leader Email:  
 
Other Chaperones/Roles in School/ Phone Numbers on Field Trip: 
Attach a separate sheet if necessary. 
 
Name 
Role 
Phone # 
Email 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 33:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 33 of 80 
 
Staff are not permitted to drive students. Privately owned 
vehicles, vehicles from non-approved vendors, or leased 
vehicles are not to be used to transport students to and from 
field trips except in the case of a bona fide emergency. Staff 
who use their own vehicles risk being legally liable. Please refer 
to TRN-03 for regulations regarding field trip transportation. 
 
STUDENT PARTICIPANTS: 
Please attach a student roster that includes: Legal and last 
name, D.O.B, grade, emergency contact name, and phone #. 
 
TRANSPORTATION INFORMATION: 
 
 
Method of Transportation:  
 
 
Transportation Company:  
 
(For bus transportation, only BPS-approved vendors may be 
used regardless of how the trip is paid for. See TRN-3 for list.) 
Contact Information (phone and address):  
 
 
 
 
Departure Location and Time:  
 
Return Location and Time:  
 
*If applicable, attach detailed train or flight information. 


Page 34:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 34 of 80 
 
 
FUNDING SOURCES: 
Total Cost: $  
 
 
Funding Source: 
 
Grant Number:  
 
BEDF Account Code/Description:  
 
 
 
 
Approved by:  
 
Principal/Head of School 
or Sponsoring District Department 
Date:  
 
Your signature indicates that all policies outlined in CAO-22 AND 
CAO-24 regarding overnight field trips will be followed. 


Page 35:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 35 of 80 
 
 
EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN (EAP) 
PROCEDURES FOR CALLING 911 ON A FIELD TRIP 
Do not leave the injured person alone or without an adult 
present. 
 
1. REMAIN CALM. This helps the operator receive your 
information. 
2. DIAL 911. Remember you may need to access an outside line 
first. 
3. My name is  
. I am a (your role) in the Boston 
Public Schools. 
4. I need paramedics now. 
5. My exact address is  
. 
6. There is a person with a (state type/location of injury) injury. 
7. The person’s name is  
and they are  
 
years old. 
8. The person is located at  
which is on the 
(North/South/East/West) side of the facility. 
9. I am calling from (telephone number). 
10.(Name) will meet the ambulance. 
11. Don’t hang up. Ask for the information to be repeated back 
to you and answer any questions the dispatcher may have. 
Hang up the phone when all information is correct and 
verified. 


Page 36:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 36 of 80 
 
 
12. Wait with the person until EMS arrives. 
13. Paramedics will take over care of the person when they 
arrive. A chaperone must accompany any injured student in 
the ambulance and remain with the student until the 
parent/guardian arrives. 
14. Call your head of school or appointee. The Department of 
Global Education can assist in contacting the necessary 
district personnel and insurance providers. File an Overnight 
Program Incident Report and Overnight Incident Log. 
Principal/Head of School:  
 
 
Phone Numbers:  
 
Principal Leader:  
 
Department of Safety Services: (617) 635-8000 
Department of Global Education: 
 
 
Additional Phone Numbers:  
 


Page 37:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 37 of 80 
 
 
PARENTAL AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC 
OVERNIGHT FIELD TRIP 
ASSUMPTION OF RISK, WAIVER, RELEASE, AND INDEMNITY 
HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT 
Program Leaders: 
Access the required Assumption of Risk, Waiver, Release, and 
Indemnity Hold Harmless Agreement template here. Please 
make a copy of this template document before you edit the text 
in RED, and then share it with the Director of Global Education. 
This document is to be reviewed by the Director of Global 
Education & BPS Legal BEFORE sharing with parents/guardians 
for signature** 
This document is a requirement, and a binding legal document. 
Should you have any questions, please contact the Department 
of Global Education. 


Page 38:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 38 of 80 
 
 
MEDICAL FORM OVERNIGHT TRIPS 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
IMPORTANT NOTES: 
• Students may be in new and unfamiliar situations when 
traveling. It is critical that this form is completed thoroughly 
and accurately so we may be in the best position possible to 
support you/your child. 
• Please indicate with an X  
HERE if you would like to 
schedule a meeting with the program leader of the trip to 
discuss your child’s medical or mental health. 
• To participate in a domestic overnight trip, a copy of the 
student’s current school year physical examination record 
must be on file at the school in order to participate on an 
overnight field trip. If traveling internationally, all students 
must visit their primary care doctor prior to traveling and be 
current on all immunizations and vaccinations for the U.S. in 
addition to the recommended immunizations and 
vaccinations for the locations/country(s) to be visited. 
• To be completed by the parent/guardian of the BPS student. 


Page 39:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 39 of 80 
 
 
STUDENT INFORMATION 
 
Student’s Full Name: 
 
 
Date of Birth: 
 
 
Country of Origin: 
Parent/Guardian Name: 
 
 
Cell: 
Home: 
Work: 
Email: 
Home Address: 
Parent/Guardian Name: 
 
 
Cell: 
Home: 
Work: 
Email: 
Home Address: 


Page 40:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 40 of 80 
 
 
Emergency Contact # 1 
 
 
Name: 
 
 
Relationship to student: 
 
 
Address: 
 
 
Cell #: 
Work #: 
Email: 
Emergency Contact # 2 
 
 
Name: 
 
 
Relationship to student: 
 
 
Address: 
 
 
Cell #: 
Work #: 
Email: 


Page 41:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 41 of 80 
 
 
MEDICAL FORM OVERNIGHT TRIPS 
STUDENT HEALTH QUESTIONS 
IMPORTANT NOTES to be completed by the parent/guardian of 
the BPS student at least two months in advance of trip: 
1. Primary care physician’s name and contact information (in 
case of an emergency): 
 
 
2. Health insurance provider’s name, policy #, and contact 
information (in case of emergency): 
 
 
3. Insurance provider claim instructions/procedures (in case of 
emergency): 
 
 
4. The student has the following health conditions and/or 
allergies of which BPS should be 
aware: 
 
 
5. Physical health conditions: 
 
 
6. Behavioral/mental health conditions: (e.g., depression, 
anxiety, etc.) 
 
 
7. Allergies (food, medication, insects, plants, animals, etc.): 


Page 42:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 42 of 80 
 
 
8. The student takes the following medications (including 
over-the-counter and herbal) and/or prescriptions of which 
BPS should be aware. (Be sure to complete the Medical 
Administration Form): 
 
 
9. If medication is taken on an as-needed basis, specify the 
symptoms or conditions when medication is to be taken 
and the time at which it may be given again. 
 
 
10. Is there any factor that makes it advisable for your child to 
follow a limited program of physical activity? (i.e., asthma, 
recent surgery, heart condition, fear, etc.) If yes, specify the 
ways in which you wish their program limited. If the student 
has asthma, please attach the asthma action plan to this 
medical form. 
 
 
11. Are there any activities on the itinerary that your child 
cannot or should not do? 
 
 
12. Other than a yearly physical, is the student currently under a 
physician’s or other medical professional’s care (e.g., social 
worker, therapist, etc.)? If yes, please detail the reason. 


Page 43:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 43 of 80 
 
 
13. Other than a yearly physical, has the student been under a 
physician’s or other medical professional’s (e.g., social 
worker, therapist, etc.) care anytime in the last year. If yes, 
please detail the reason and dates of treatment. 
 
 
14. Please list any hospital, treatment center, surgical, 
psychiatric, or urgent care visits within the last year: (Please 
specify the date, the reason, the physician or professional 
seen, and the length of stay.) 
 
 
15. Additional information of which BPS should be aware 
concerning student’s health: 


Page 44:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 44 of 80 
 
 
I authorize the release of the information given above to 
chaperones and other school staff in order to coordinate 
services and understand that chaperones will consult with 
the school nurse about each student's health so they will be 
in the strongest position to support you/your child on this 
program. 
 
 
 
Student Signature, if at least 18 years of age 
Date 
 
 
 
 
Parent/Guardian Signature, if the student 
Date 
is under 18 years of age 
 
 
▪ If necessary, attach the doctor’s letter to this form. 
▪ If necessary, attach the asthma action plan to this form. 
▪ If necessary, attach the diabetes action plan to this form. 
▪ If necessary, attach copies that document student shots 
and immunizations to this form. 


Page 45:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 45 of 80 
 
 
MEDICAL FORM: OVERNIGHT TRIPS 
MEDICATION ADMINISTRATION 
 
*Please send only essential medications with your student 
on this trip. 
 
 
Student Name:  
 
1. Name of Medication:  
 
Time(s) to be taken:  
 
Reason for Medication:  
 
Side effects to be aware of/other information:  
 
 
 
2. Name of Medication:  
 
 
Time(s) to be taken:  
 
Reason for Medication:  
 
Side effects to be aware of/other information:  
 
 
 


Page 46:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 46 of 80 
 
 
3. Name of Medication:  
 
Time(s) to be taken:  
 
Reason for Medication:  
 
Side effects to be aware of/other information:  
 
 
 
4. Name of Medication:  
 
 
Time(s) to be taken:  
 
 
Reason for Medication:  
 
Side effects to be aware of/other information:  
 
 
 
 
 
Additional information/special instructions: 


Page 47:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 47 of 80 
 
 
I authorize my child to take the above medications on this trip. 
 
 
 
 
 
Student Signature, if at least 18 years of age 
Date 
 
 
 
 
Parent/Guardian Signature, if student is 
Date 
under 18 years of age 


Page 48:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 48 of 80 
 
 
TRAVEL CONSENT FORM (PAGE 1) 
 
The parties to this agreement are: 
Parent/ Legal Guardian: (hereinafter referred to as “the 
parent/guardian”) 
 
First and Last Name: 
 
Physical Address: 
 
Contact Details: 
 
Child: (hereinafter referred to as “the child”) 
 
 
First and Last Name: 
 
Birthdate: 
 
Traveling Guardian(s) and Contact Details: (hereinafter referred 
to as “The Traveling Guardians”) 
 
 
Full Name: 
Address: 
Contact Details: 


Page 49:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 49 of 80 
 
 
Notarized Parent/Guardian Airline Travel Consent Form (page 2) 
 
1. I hereby authorize the child to travel with the traveling 
guardians to the following destination: 
2. The period of travel shall be from  
 to 
 
. 
3. Should it prove to be impossible to notify the parent/ 
guardian of any change in travel plans due to an emergency 
or unforeseen circumstances arising, I authorize the 
traveling guardian to authorize such travel plans. 
4. Should the traveling guardian in their sole discretion (which 
discretion shall not be unreasonably exercised) deem it 
advisable to make special travel arrangements for the child 
to be returned home due to unforeseen circumstances 
arising, I accept full responsibility for the additional costs 
which shall be incurred thereby. 
5. I indemnify the traveling guardian against any and all claims 
whatsoever and howsoever arising, save where such claims 
arise from negligence, gross negligence, or willful intent 
during the specified period of this travel consent. 
6. I declare that I am the legal custodian of the child and that I 
have the legal authority to grant travel consent to the 
traveling guardian of the child. 
7. Unless inconsistent with the context, words signifying the 
singular shall include the plural and vice versa. 


Page 50:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 50 of 80 
 
 
Notarized Parent/Guardian Airline Travel Consent Form (page 3) 
 
 
Signed at  
on the  
day of 
 
, 20 
. 
 
Signature  
(Parent/ Guardian) 
Signature  
 
(Witness 1) 
Signature  
(Witness 2) 
*Witness signatures must be by independent persons and not by 
anyone listed on the Travel Consent form. 
 
On this  
day of  
, 20  
, before me, 
the undersigned authority, personally appeared and proved to 
me through satisfactory evidence of identity, to wit, to be the 
person(s) whose name(s) is/are signed on the attached 
document and who signed in my presence. 
 
 
Official Notary Signature:  
 
 
 
Name of Notary Typed, Printed or Stamped: 
 
 
Commission Expires:  
 


Page 51:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 51 of 80 
 
 
STUDENT SUPPORT DURING DOMESTIC OVERNIGHT 
PROGRAMS FORM (RECOMMENDED) 
 
 
Note: This form is to be completed by students who intend to 
participate in an overnight program. The information is 
confidential and will be used by program leaders to better 
understand and support the needs of students while on program 
in a foreign country. 
Student First & Last Name:  
 
 
 
When preparing for your international program, please think 
about the following questions, and respond as honestly as 
possible in order to be supported: 
1. What are you nervous about? 
 
 
 
 
2. What are you excited about? 
 
 
 
 
3. What scares you about the trip location or activities 
(itinerary)? 


Page 52:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 52 of 80 
 
 
4. When in a new environment, I get anxious when… 
 
 
 
 
5. When in a new environment, I get upset when… 
 
 
 
 
6. In order to get the most learning and benefits from 
this experience, I will need… 


Page 53:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 53 of 80 
 
 
DOMESTIC OVERNIGHT PROGRAMS INCIDENT REPORT 
Incident reports should be used for all yellow and red incidents 
that are not fully described or investigated already through the 
SOAP Note. 
 
A. Complete all Fields: 
School/s:  
 
Date of Report:  
 
Country: 
 
Incident Date and Time:  
 
Reporting Chaperone:  
 
B. Complete all Applicable Fields: 
 
Victim(s) Name(s) 
Contact Information 
 
Suspect(s) Name(s) 
Contact Information 
 
Witness(s) Name(s) 
Contact Information 
 
Location of Event 
Address 
 


Page 54:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 54 of 80 
 
 
Domestic Overnight Programs Incident Report (page 2) 
 
C. Nature of Incident (check all that apply) 
 
 Injury 
 Equipment Fail 
 Behavioral/ 
Psychological 
 Illness 
 Missing/Separa- 
ted Person 
 Natural Disaster 
 Physical Assault 
 Sexual 
Assault 
 Theft 
 Property 
Damage 
 Sexual 
Harassment 
 Fatality 
 Crime 
 Political 
Upheaval 
 Disease 
Outbreak 
 BPS Code 
of Conduct 
violation 
 Other: 
 
 
D. Narrative (Using facts, describe what happened): 


Page 55:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 55 of 80 
 
 
Domestic Overnight Programs Incident Report (page 3) 
 
E. Activity at Time of Incident (check all that apply) 
 
 Class time 
 Service 
 Homestay 
 Traveling 
 Fieldtrip 
 Camping 
 Hike/Jog/Walk 
 Swimming 
 Water Activity 
 Other: 
 
 
F. Contributing Factors (Check all that apply) 
 
 Not disclosed in 
medical form 
 Sports/Recreation 
 Animal/Insect/Plant 
 Pre-Existing 
Condition 
 Alcohol/Drugs/ 
Medication 
 Motor Vehicle 
 Weather/Terrain 
 Pre-Course Info 
 Orientation/ 
Training 
 Political/ 
Cultural/ 
Language 
 Other 
 


Page 56:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 56 of 80 
 
 
Domestic Overnight Programs Incident Report (page 3) 
 
G. Action Taken 
Details 
First Aid 
When 
By Whom 
 
Type (i.e., medication, CPR, 
etc.) 
 
Emergency Evacuation 
 
Visit Medical Facility 
Name of Facility 
Doctor/PA/Nurse 
Reported Diagnosis 
Medication Prescribed 
 
Emergency Contact Person 
Notified? 
☐ Yes 
☐No 
Name: 
Date and Time Contacted: 
Notes: 


Page 57:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 57 of 80 
 
 
G. Action Taken 
Details 
Department of Global 
Education (DGE) Contacted? 
☐ Yes 
☐No 
Name: 
Date and Time DGE Contacted: 
Notes: 
Insurance Contacted? 
☐ Yes 
☐No 
Name: 
Date and Time Contacted: 
Claim #: 
Notes: 
Local Authorities Notified? 
☐ Yes 
☐No 
Date and Time Notified: 
Organization: 
Authority Name(s): 
Notes: 


Page 58:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 58 of 80 
 
 
G. Action Taken 
Details 
Follow-up Plan 
Details: 
 
 
 
Signature of Reporting Chaperone: 
Date: 
File this Overnight Incident Programs Report along with 
any accompanying reports/documents from local law 
enforcement, medical professionals, and/or International 
Programs Witness Report via email if possible OR as soon 
as circumstances permit. Turn in the original report to the 
DGE as soon as you return to Boston. Incident reports 
require at least one witness signature, and where possible 
the signatures of all impacted participants. 


Page 59:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 59 of 80 
 
 
Domestic Overnight Programs Incident Report (page 6) 
 
 
Witness Signature 
Date 
Signatures of those impacted: 
1. 
Date:  
 
2. 
Date:  
 
 
3. 
Date:  
 
4. 
Date:  
 


Page 60:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 60 of 80 
 
 
DOMESTIC OVERNIGHT PROGRAMS WITNESS REPORT 
Witnesses shall use this form to provide a statement of their 
observations to accompany the Incident Report Form. 
 
Witness Statement of [Name]:  
 
Phone Number:  
 
Address: 
 
 
 
 
Description of Incident: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I believe the contents of this statement are true. 
Signature:  
 Date:  
 


Page 61:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 61 of 80 
 
 
DOMESTIC OVERNIGHT PROGRAMS 
INVESTIGATION LOG 
This template can be used to take running notes during an 
investigation. 
 
Event 
Time 
Location 
Parties 
Involved 
Source of 
Information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 62:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 62 of 80 
 
 
Event 
Time 
Location 
Parties 
Involved 
Source of 
Information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature of Investigator 
Date 


Page 63:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 63 of 80 
 
 
SOAP NOTE 
SOAP Notes should be used for live documentation of all health 
related incidents requiring further monitoring and/or 
evacuation. SOAP Notes should be attached to the 
corresponding Incident Report. 
 
Subjective: What the patient tells you; note the chief 
complaint(s): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objective: What you see; vital signs; general survey of patient: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assessment: What you think is going on; diagnosis presented by 
medical professional: 
 
 
 
 
Anticipated Problems: 


Page 64:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 64 of 80 
 
 
Plan: What will be done about it; Tests ordered, medications 
prescribed, follow up needed: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reporting Chaperone 
Date 
File this SOAP Note along with any accompanying 
reports/documents from local law enforcement, medical 
professionals and/or International Programs Witness Report via 
email if possible OR as soon as circumstances permit. Turn in the 
original report to the DGE as soon as you return to Boston. 


Page 65:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 65 of 80 
 
 
FIRE PREVENTION AND SAFETY PRACTICES 
OVERNIGHT PROGRAMS 
Fire safety plans on overnight and international programs 
differ from the procedures set for our schools. The laws that 
regulate fire prevention may differ from what exists in 
Massachusetts. The steps below must be followed on all 
overnight and international programs: 
1. Conduct a fire prevention assessment. 
The program leader must conduct a fire safety 
prevention assessment using the Fire Prevention and 
Safety Form (Attachment A) within 24 hours of arrival. 
Using the Fire Prevention and Safety Form, the 
program leader shall formulate a plan for the 
evacuation of all persons on the trip in the event of a 
fire or other emergency. This plan shall include 
alternate means of egress and should be created in 
consultation with an accommodation staff person, and 
if applicable, the third-party provider. 
2. Prepare Chaperone Team on fire prevention strategy. 
Based on the results from the Fire Prevention and 
Safety Form, the program leader should ensure that 
each staff member receives and understands the fire 
prevention landscape and has instructions on the fire 
drill procedure created for the accommodation. 
Questions to review include: 
a. What are the best means of egress in case of a fire? 
(Consider all rooms students and staff are staying in 


Page 66:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 66 of 80 
 
 
and all places where the group may congregate. Use 
the hotel’s posted evacuation routes if applicable.) 
b. Where is the designated meeting point? (This 
meeting point should be a safe distance from the 
building, but easy for the group to identify and 
locate.) 
c. Who is responsible for each student? (Attendance 
must be taken; if chaperone ratios permit, the lead 
chaperone should not be assigned to a group and 
should serve as the contact person for emergency 
personnel.) 
d. What are some hazards that students and 
chaperones should be aware of? 
e. What happens in the case of a missing person? 
3. Review prevention strategy with students and conduct a 
fire drill. 
The lead chaperone and the chaperone team will 
review the fire prevention strategy and conduct a fire 
drill (walkthrough) with the students within the first 24 
hours of the trip. Conducting a fire drill (walkthrough) 
is important as participants are unfamiliar with the 
building. 
Instructions for fire drills: 
Since each accommodation is different, each plan and 
drill will vary. Regardless of the accommodation, it is 
critical that a procedure is in place for evacuating the 
building, each chaperone knows their responsibilities, 
every student participates in the fire drill 


Page 67:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 67 of 80 
 
 
(walkthrough), and each person knows the meeting 
location when evacuated from the building. Please 
note: A fire drill as defined here is a walkthrough of the 
route the group will take to exit the premises in the 
event of an emergency. 
A few general instructions: 
● Evacuate immediately. 
● Do not use elevators during a fire evacuation. 
● Each student should walk to the designated meeting 
location outside of the building in a quiet and orderly 
manner. 
● Make sure all students know all possible exits from 
their area and that students know where the meeting 
location is outside of the building. 
● Fire drill plans must ensure adequate procedures for 
the emergency evacuation of students and staff with 
disabilities. (Have a staging location for students/staff 
with disabilities and make sure hotel/hostel personnel 
are also aware.) 
● Chaperones are responsible for students under their 
supervision and must take attendance. 


Page 68:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 68 of 80 
 
 
● Upon the evacuation of a building, no person or 
persons shall re-enter the building without the 
authorization of the lead chaperone. The lead 
chaperone, as a part of their fire drill procedures, must 
establish a command procedure for such evacuations. 
4. Conduct a post-fire drill debrief. 
After the fire drill, the chaperone team should set aside 
time to debrief. Record response on Attachment A. 


Page 69:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 69 of 80 
 
 
FIRE PREVENTION AND SAFETY ASSESSMENT FORM 
For each accommodation, please complete and, upon your 
return, file this form with other documents you are 
mandated to keep. Legally, these documents must be kept 
on file for the current fiscal year plus three additional years 
after the field trip has occurred. 
 
BUILDING: 
Program Leader:  
 
 
Date of the Safety Prevention Assessment:  
 
Name/s and Titles of Staff Consulted for Assessment:  
 
 
 
(accommodation staff/ program provider staff) 
 
 
OUTSIDE THE BUILDING: 
List the possible hazards in the area: 
 
 
 
 
Can the accommodation be accessed by a fire department 
or emergency team?  YES 
 NO 


Page 70:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 70 of 80 
 
 
INSIDE THE BUILDING 
 
Equipment: 
Does the building have fire alarms? 
☐ YES 
☐ NO 
Are there fire sprinklers? 
☐ YES 
☐ NO 
If yes, where are they located? 
 
 
 
Is there adequate lighting in the corridors? 
 
☐ YES 
 
☐ NO 
Are there clear exit signs? 
☐ YES 
☐ NO 
Are there fire alarm pull stations? 
☐ YES 
☐ NO 
Are the fire alarm pull stations visible and 
accessible? 
 
☐ YES 
 
☐ NO 
Are there fire extinguishers? 
☐ YES 
☐ NO 
If yes, where? 
 
 
 
Are there smoke detectors in the corridors and in 
 
 
every room where participants are staying? 
☐YES 
☐NO 
 
 
Hazards: 
List the potential fire hazards at the site: 
 
 
 
 
Are there notable fire hazards such as open fire doors, 
accumulated trash, blocked corridors, locked exit doors, blocked 


Page 71:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 71 of 80 
 
 
stairways, burned-out exit lights, or missing/broken fire 
equipment? 
☐ YES 
☐ NO 
Means of Evacuation/Egress: 
 
 
Does the facility have an evacuation plan for 
each room? (If not, be sure that when you 
conduct a fire drill (walkthrough) that you 
develop a plan for leaving the room.) 
 
 
 
☐ YES 
 
 
 
☐ NO 
What are the means of egress? 
 
 
 
Are there primary exits and alternate exits? 
 
☐ YES 
 
☐ NO 
Note locations: 
 
 
 
FIRE DRILL/WALKTHROUGH PLAN: 
 
 
(Please record notes below.) 
 
 


Page 72:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 72 of 80 
 
 
POST-DRILL DEBRIEF: 
Date and time of the fire drill:  
 
 
 
Did the students and chaperones follow the procedures of the 
fire drill? If no, why not? 
☐YES 
☐NO 
 
 
 
 
Based on this debrief, either inform the students of your 
findings for adjustments or, if necessary, conduct another 
fire drill. Once the safety review and drill are completed, 
please sign below. 
 
Signature of Program Leader:  
 


Page 73:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 73 of 80 
 
 
BPS STUDENT TRAVELER & FAMILY AGREEMENT 
FOR DOMESTIC OVERNIGHT TRAVEL 
Overview: Positive behavior is a key expectation for students 
participating in domestic and international travel opportunities. 
Positive behavior reflects trustworthiness, respect, responsibility, 
ambassadorship, and service. Participants are expected to fully 
participate, follow all program guidelines, and behave 
appropriately to ensure a high-quality learning experience. 
Parent/guardians: please read this contract carefully with your 
student and sign it. 
Students: your signature on this contract seals your commitment 
to follow behavior expectations leading up to, and during your 
school trip. 
 
STUDENTS: 
Before I go on the trip: 
● I understand that my acceptance to a trip prior to departure 
does not guarantee that I will be allowed to attend. 
● I have access to my school's handbook which includes all 
BPS and school rules and the BPS Code of Conduct. 
● I know that it is my responsibility to follow all BPS rules and 
guidelines set by the administrator or chaperone. 
● I will attend all mandatory pre-departure meetings and 
complete all mandatory paperwork. 
● I will not violate the BPS Code of Conduct. 


Page 74:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 74 of 80 
 
 
● I will not distribute or consume alcohol or drugs (including 
edibles) and/or encourage actions that are against the BPS 
Code of Conduct or law. 
● I will not pack any illegal or inappropriate items (i.e., items in 
violation of the BPS Code of Conduct, including, but not 
limited to: weapons, alcohol, edibles, drug paraphernalia). 
● I will be compliant with any guidelines set by the school, 
administrator, or chaperone regarding program 
expectations and any required materials, such as completed 
projects, journals, and service hours. 
● I know that if I do not act appropriately, or if I violate any 
rule, there are consequences for my actions. Such 
consequences include, but are not limited to, not being 
allowed to participate in the international trip program. 
While I am on the trip: 
● I will not violate the BPS Code of Conduct. 
● I will ask for help from the adults when needed. 
● I will treat my peers, all adults, and all people with the 
utmost level of respect. 
● I will not purchase, distribute, or consume any illegal or 
inappropriate items (i.e., items in violation of BPS Code of 
Conduct, including but not limited to: weapons, alcohol, 
edibles, drug paraphernalia), even if these substances are 
legal in the state or foreign country, or I am of legal age in 
the foreign country. 


Page 75:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 75 of 80 
 
 
● I will use social media responsibly during the trip and will 
not post or communicate any information regarding other 
students during an emergency. 
● I will abide by the established curfew and sleep alone in my 
assigned bed and sleeping location each night. 
● I will not vandalize any property at any venue I visit (hotel, 
tour bus, tourist sites, homestay location). 
● I will obey the BPS dress code, as well as the suggested 
attire for the foreign country and specific sites and locations 
within the foreign country I will visit. 
● I will not share any medication with anyone on the trip. 
● I will take medication prescribed for me by my doctor for 
required or recommended medical use while abroad (e.g., 
malaria pills, asthma inhaler, prescriptions for anxiety, 
depression). 
● I will not leave the group at any time unless specifically 
authorized to do so. 
● I will practice good common sense, respect, and 
consideration for others and their property. 
● I understand that I am responsible for keeping my passport, 
important belongings, and other travel documents safe. 
● I understand that partaking in any illegal activity abroad can 
result in my arrest. 
● I understand that if an issue of any kind arises, my 
chaperone will address the issue, and their decision is final. 


Page 76:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 76 of 80 
 
 
● I know that if I do not act appropriately, or if I violate any 
rule, that there are consequences for my actions. Such 
consequences include, but are not limited to, being sent 
home at my parent/guardian's expense. 
 
PARENT/GUARDIANS/ STUDENTS AGE 18 OR OLDER: 
I fully understand the following conditions regarding student 
international travel with BPS: 
1. The BPS Code of Conduct applies to all field trips. Following 
an investigation, if the program leader, in consultation with 
the principal/head of school and Central Office staff, 
determines that a student’s conduct while on an overnight 
trip poses a risk to themselves, or the safety of the group, or 
is no longer manageable by BPS staff in the field, the district 
reserves the right to request and arrange for that student to 
return home. The district also reserves the right to request 
that families assume responsibility for all or a portion of the 
costs associated with their child’s return. Students may be 
subject to further disciplinary action and will be provided 
the opportunity to have a formal hearing at the school level 
upon return. 
2. If a student is to be dismissed from an overnight field trip 
due to behavior that violates the BPS Code of Conduct while 
participating in a domestic overnight trip, the student’s 
parent/guardian must be notified in advance and should 
agree to meet the student at the airport or other agreed- 
upon destination. If the parent/guardian is not reachable, 
the student’s principal or appropriate school-based point of 
contact must be notified and agree to meet the student at 
the airport or other agreed-upon destination. Students 
under the age of 16 must be accompanied on their flight by 


Page 77:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 77 of 80 
 
 
a chaperone. Students over the age of 16 may fly 
unaccompanied, though a chaperone must accompany the 
student to the airport to ensure the student checks in for 
their flight. (Age requirements may be subject to specific 
airline/train/bus guidelines). Any costs assumed in this 
regard will be the responsibility of the parent/guardian. 
3. Parents or students who sign contracts and/or agreements 
with third-party company vendors acknowledge that 
outside companies’ protocols and procedures might differ 
from BPS policies and procedures. Families should 
especially be aware of cancellation and refund policies. BPS 
is not responsible for money paid to third-party vendors. 
4. BPS reserves the right to cancel a trip at any time. Trip 
destinations that impose an immediate risk to our students 
will be canceled. In these instances, all families will be 
notified immediately. 
 
 
(Families: Keep this page.) 


Page 78:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 78 of 80 
 
 
(Program leaders: Keep this page.) 
 
 
STUDENT/GUARDIAN STATEMENT OF UNDERSTANDING 
We have read and understand the BPS Student Traveler & 
Family Agreement Form. We understand what is expected of the 
prospective student traveler and feel that we, the 
parent/guardian and student, can commit to these expectations. 
PARENT/GUARDIAN (print name):  
 
 
PARENT/GUARDIAN (signature)  
 
DATE  
 
PHONE NUMBER:  
 
STUDENT (print name):  
 
 
STUDENT (signature):  
 
DATE:  
 
PHONE NUMBER:  
 
 
 
(Students: Return this page to your program leader.) 


Page 79:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 79 of 80 
 
 
BPS CHAPERONE AGREEMENT FORM 
This form is to be completed by all chaperones of BPS sponsored 
field trips and submitted to the program leader (lead 
chaperone). 
 
School Name:  
 
 
Destination:  
 
 
Departure Date:  
Return Date:  
 
 
 
All chaperones must agree to abide by the following code of 
conduct in order to participate in a BPS-sponsored field trip. 
 
SAFETY & RESPONSIBILITY 
I understand that my safety and the safety of other 
participants are extremely important during this field trip, 
and I agree to make safety my first priority. I agree to 
conduct myself in a manner that promotes my safety and 
the safety of others at all times. I understand that 
maintaining students’ safety requires that students must be 
supervised by me and/or other chaperones at all times 
while students are engaged in field trip activities. For 
overnight and international field trips, I understand that 
nighttime curfews and room checks for students, as well as 
morning wake-up calls for students, are part of my 
responsibility. I agree to follow BPS policies, protocols, and 
guidance of BPS staff when in the field. 


Page 80:
Superintendent’s Circular CAO-24 
Page 80 of 80 
 
 
DRUG & ALCOHOL POLICY 
I understand that the BPS Code of Conduct prohibits 
students from possessing, using, selling, and/or distributing 
any of the following on all domestic and international field 
trips: 
Alcohol; marijuana, non-prescribed controlled substances, 
imitation controlled substances, inhalants, other intoxicants, 
controlled or drug paraphernalia; unauthorized possession, 
use, or distribution of over-the-counter medication, and 
selling of prescription drugs. The Code also prohibits the use 
of tobacco products (including e-cigarettes, hookah 
paraphernalia, and vapor cigarettes). I understand that 
these prohibitions apply to all students, regardless of age. 
I understand that I am forbidden to use or visibly be in 
possession of tobacco in the presence of students. I also 
understand that the use of all other drugs, including 
alcohol, and weapons are strictly prohibited on the field trip. 
 
 
Chaperone Name (Printed):  
 
 
Chaperone Name (Signature):  
 
 
Date:  
 


