Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
COM-02 
Version 01 
 
 
MEDIA RELATIONS POLICY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to cultivating and 
maintaining an open and productive relationship with the news 
media. The district recognizes that the media provides a public 
service, are viewed as a reliable source of news about the Boston 
Public Schools and seeks to provide timely and accurate 
information toward that end. 
The district maintains that the top priority of schools is to 
educate students and ensure the safety and privacy of all 
students, staff, and families. 
 To balance the responsibilities of schools and the need to provide 
information to the media, all press inquiries about the Boston 
Public Schools or any individual school, student, staff member, 
program, or initiative are to be directed first to the 
Communications Office. 
 Any staff member contacted directly by a member of the news 
media must refer the reporter to the Communications Office, 
who will work with staff and the media outlet to respond 
appropriately to the inquiry. 
 District officials, schools, and staff must cooperate with the news 
media to the extent required and appropriate by law while 
ensuring that media coverage does not interfere with teaching 
and learning. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular COM-02 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 It is critically important to protect the privacy of students and 
staff while fulfilling the requirements of public records laws. The 
Communications Office works closely with the Legal Advisor to 
determine what information is a matter of public record and 
what must remain confidential. Only a student whose parent or 
guardian has signed and returned a Media Appearances form 
may be recorded, filmed, photographed, or interviewed. Students 
for whom no such consent is on file in the school office may not 
participate in any media-related activities, and their name and 
image are not to be released to the media or anyone else outside 
of the school. For more information, see the Guide to the Boston 
Public Schools for Families and Students. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Communications  
Department: 
Chief of Communications 
Mailing 
Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9265 
Email: 
communications@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


