Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
COM-01 
Version 01 
 
 
COMMUNICATIONS POLICY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The Boston Public Schools (BPS), Boston School Committee, 
superintendent, and all central and school-based staff are 
responsible for communicating accurately and effectively with 
families, students, colleagues, partners, and the community. 
Ongoing communication with all stakeholders is essential to 
developing and sustaining effective home/school/community 
partnerships for improving student achievement.  
The Boston School Committee affirms the following principles:  
● Families and citizens have a right to know what is occurring 
in their public schools.  
● All BPS employees have an obligation to ensure the public is 
kept systematically and adequately informed.  
● Boston Public Schools staff and families benefit from 
improved sharing of information – positive and negative.   
● Written and verbal communication from schools and 
employees should reflect the BPS commitment to 
supporting all children and families, focusing on student 
achievement through high-quality teaching and learning.  
● Effective communication requires an ongoing two-way 
exchange between schools and constituents, including 


Page 2:
 
Superintendent’s Circular COM-01 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
thoughtful mechanisms at the school and district levels for 
seeking family, student, and community perspectives on 
critical issues and decisions.  
● Language used to communicate with families and the 
community must be free of educational jargon, acronyms, 
and other terminology unfamiliar to non-educators.  
● All communication must reflect and be sensitive to the 
diversity of BPS families and staff, free of bias with respect 
to race, ethnicity, language, education, income, gender, 
religion, sexual orientation, or disability.  
In keeping with these principles, the superintendent shall issue 
district-wide procedures and guidelines to foster effective 
communication in crucial areas such as media relations, 
emergency communications, customer service, publications, 
presentations, photography, events, and 
translation/interpretation.  
To ensure brand consistency and help families identify official 
BPS publications and properties, schools and departments must 
display the BPS logo on websites and publications. School and 
department stationery and signage should incorporate the BPS 
logo, the Boston city seal, or both. The BPS logo may not be 
altered and must be reproduced in its correct aspect ratio. The 
logo digital and printable files are available at the BPS-LOGO 
folder. 
It is the responsibility of every school, office, and program in the 
Boston Public Schools to adhere to these procedures and 
execute additional effective communication strategies. The BPS 
Communications Office shall provide leadership, resources, 
guidance, and technical assistance to support the district and 
schools in these efforts. 


Page 3:
 
Superintendent’s Circular COM-01 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
 
 


Page 4:
 
Superintendent’s Circular COM-01 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
owner:  
Chief of Communications  
Department:  
Chief of Communications 
Mailing Address:  Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone:  
617-635-9265 
Email:  
communications@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


