Page 1:
 
 
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
EL-07 
Version 01 
 
BPS INSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM AND MONITORING FOR  
MULTILINGUAL LEARNERS  
 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
This superintendent’s circular outlines the district’s instructional 
system and monitoring for multilingual learners, including:  
1. Instructional Expectations and Resources:  
a. Defining high-quality instructional expectations and 
materials for our multilingual learners and multilingual 
learners with disabilities (MLWD) 
b. Curating and outlining resources for schools, classroom 
staff, and school leaders to change and improve 
current practices in classrooms serving Multilingual 
learners and those with disabilities  
2. Monitoring of Multilingual Learners’ Instruction:  
a. Monitoring Individualized Learning Plans (ILPs) for 
multilingual learners who have not met ACCESS 
progress benchmarks  


Page 2:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 2 of 18 
 
b. Conducting classroom observations by school leaders 
and district regional support teams or ESL and content 
instruction across programs serving Multilingual 
learners  
In accordance with the DOJ agreement for ELE services, an 
overview of ELE services, compliance monitoring, accountability, 
and DOJ reporting schedule is outlined here.  
 
INSTRUCTIONAL EXPECTATIONS  
The circular provides foundational information on practices and 
expectations regarding high-quality instruction and grade-level 
content instruction for our MLs aligned to MA-DESE frameworks 
and grade-level standards. Included are resources for classroom 
staff and school leaders to align and improve current classroom 
practices. The research-based resources and strategies will 
provide consistent, high-quality educational practices across the 
District to develop a systemwide understanding of expectations 
for instructing our multilingual learners and those with 
disabilities.  
One priority of the Office of Multilingual and Multicultural 
Education (OMME) is to outline instructional expectations with 
guidance and resources for multilingual learner (ML) educators to 
accelerate MLs’ language acquisition and support their growth 
across content. All MLs are entitled to meaningful access to 
grade-level content learning and English language development 
(ELD) instruction to build their English language skills in all four 
language domains (reading, writing, listening, and speaking). All 


Page 3:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 3 of 18 
 
MLs regardless of program or placement are entitled to receive 
sheltered content with an SEI teacher and ESL services with an 
ESL-certified teacher1. To that end, OMME is committed to 
providing all ESL and SEI content teachers with tools that best 
support MLs.  
 
GROUNDING THE INSTRUCTIONAL CORE IN WIDA AND MA 
CURRICULUM FRAMEWORKS  
To maintain high-quality content and language learning for MLs, 
it is paramount to center all ML instruction for Fall 2023 and 
beyond on research-based standards for language development 
as well as grade-level content. OMME expects that the MA 
Curriculum Frameworks and WIDA 2020 Standards Framework 
are the foundations for all effective delivery of English as a 
Second Language (ESL) instruction and English Learner 
Education programs.  
OMME has created clear and explicit guidance around what 
defines English as a Second Language (ESL) instruction in Boston 
Public Schools (BPS) and the varied programmatic structures it 
may take. ESL is its own subject matter and provides explicit, 
systematic, and sustained language instruction to promote MLs’ 
success at school and beyond. ESL is: 
 
1 Any core academic teacher of an Multilingual Learner (providing instruction in English): teachers of 
MLs with moderate disabilities; teachers of MLs with severe disabilities; teachers in English, reading or 
language arts; mathematics, science; civics and government, economics, history, and geography; early 
childhood and elementary teachers who teach MLs such subjects; and any career vocational technical 
teacher who instructs a ML. 


Page 4:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 4 of 18 
 
 
• Asset-based and culturally sustaining  
• Language driven  
• Balanced, focused on both meaning and form 
• Standards-based (i.e. ELA, History, Math, Science), rigorous, 
and integrated  
• Designed for authentic language interactions, dialogue, and 
collaboration 
• Planned and dynamic  
• Differentiated and scaffolded 
• Grounded in effective assessment practices 
 
Successful pedagogy is grounded in these frameworks and 
approaches:  
● MA Curriculum Frameworks: The frameworks establish clear 
academic expectations for what students should know and 
be able to do at the end of each school year. They 
emphasize the development of 21st-century skills with 
college and career readiness. Current curriculum 
frameworks for each content area can be found here.  
○ English Language Arts & Literacy  
○ Social Studies / Humanities  
○ Science Technology & Engineering  
○ World Language Standards  
● WIDA: A research-based, comprehensive approach to 


Page 5:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 5 of 18 
 
supporting, teaching, and assessing multilingual learners. 
The WIDA 2020 Framework and Standards prioritize equity 
of opportunity and access, integration of content and 
language, collaboration among stakeholders, and a 
functional approach to language development.  
 
Key components to effective ML teaching in the BPS:  
● Native Language : Research shows that using native 
language instruction and resources has a positive effect on 
English language development. Teachers should leverage 
students’ native-language literacy skills whenever possible 
and use that knowledge to facilitate metalinguistic 
awareness and cross-linguistic transfer. When teachers have 
a basic knowledge of students’ native language structure, 
they can better identify students’ positive and negative 
linguistic transfers. Furthermore, teachers should consider 
using native language materials to build background 
knowledge and help students transfer content-area skills 
and understandings from one language to another.  
● Collaboration Among ML Educators: BPS prioritizes teacher 
collaboration to support MLs’ success in content area 
classes and programs. “Co-Teaching ESL is a unique form of 
teacher collaboration where two teachers (an ESL and a 
grade level/content area teacher) fully share teaching 
responsibilities for a common group of students. The co-
teachers jointly plan for, deliver, and assess dedicated, 
systematic, explicit, and sustained standards-based and 
language-focused ESL instruction that connects to content 


Page 6:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 6 of 18 
 
area topics and analytical practices.” (DESE’s Quick 
Reference Guide Co-Teaching Co-Teaching ESL)  
 
MATERIALS GUIDANCE  
OMME will continue to work across academic departments to 
ensure that all materials provide scaffolding and supports for 
multilingual learners. To support this initiative, OMME has 
developed an ELD Look-For Tool that illustrates effective 
culturally and linguistically sustaining practices that are key 
instructional components for all classrooms serving Multilingual 
Learners. This tool is aligned with research-based best practices 
for MLs and to the BPS Equitable Literacy Look-Fors, and the 
Culturally Responsive Instruction Observation Protocol (CRIOP). 
In order to support the integration of content and language, 
OMME created an integrated Language Objectives writing tool 
and a series of professional development to support this initiative.  
 
Multilingual Instructional Coaches (MICs) worked throughout SY 
2022/23 to analyze district-approved tier 1 curriculum, thoroughly 
examine the WIDA 2020 Standards Framework to create a scope 
and sequence and unit maps for ESL instruction for grades K-12: 
Focus in Grades K0-2, EL Education for Grades 3-5, and StudySync 
and core content in Grades 6-12. All curriculum and support 
documents will be housed in this Boston Public Schools ESL 
Curriculum Digital Notebook.  
 
 


Page 7:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 7 of 18 
 
The work was grounded in: 
• Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary 
(DESE) Next Generation ESL Curriculum Guidance,  
• 7 Forms of Bias,  
• Culturally Responsive Teaching,  
• Systemic Functional Linguistics,  
• Equitable Literacy and Culturally and Linguistically 
Sustaining Practices,  
• the 3Ls,  
• WIDA 2020 Standards Framework, and 
• Understanding by Design (UbD). 
 
Dual Language schools have adopted a variety of authentic texts 
or trans-adapted texts / materials in the native language. OMME 
recommends usage of native language text sets aligned to grade 
level standards and units of study that meet the rigor and 
expectations for quality materials using CURATE. Additionally, the 
district recommends the following Spanish and English 
complimentary materials for dual language:  
1. Focus Transadapted Spanish Texts  
2. American Reading Company  
Other Dual Language and bilingual programs in majority BPS 
languages are provided materials in the form of authentic texts 
or transadapted texts thematically aligned to the biliteracy 
framework for the target languages that must meet grade level 
standards.  


Page 8:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 8 of 18 
 
 
In setting expectations for high-quality instruction, the District 
has a responsibility to provide district level and individualized 
coaching support for school and classroom staff. The following is 
a list of instructional recommendations with critical resources for 
teachers and school leaders serving multilingual learners and 
English learners with disabilities (ELD).  
 
SEI PROGRAMS VS. SEI CLASSROOMS  
Boston Public Schools has the highest number of MLs across the 
state. Therefore, it is expected that every BPS classroom is an SEI 
classroom (if there is at least one multilingual learner enrolled) 
with a qualified SEI teacher. Additionally, BPS offers SEI programs 
to students at ELD levels 1-3 with some language specific 
programs at specified schools to better meet the needs of 
students at ELD levels 1-3 and provide language support if the 
educator has the same language. All MLs across ELD levels and 
placement settings are expected to receive ESL instruction in 
accordance with their level, grouping per the Department of 
Justice (DOJ) and the Massachusetts Department of Elementary 
& Secondary Education (MA DESE).  
 
ESL: English as a Second Language   SCI: Sheltered Content Instruction  
NLI: Native Language Instruction  NLS: Native Language Support 
 


Page 9:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 9 of 18 
 
Program Type & 
Target  
Instructi
on Type 
BPS Instructional Expectations  
Resources 
SEI Multilingual 
Program - targeted 
for ML ELD 1-3 with 
low incidence 
languages 
✓ ESL  
✓ SCI 
● 
Grade level aligned instruction 
using district materials or 
curriculum meets MA frameworks.  
● 
Adapting or differentiation for lower 
ELD levels and/or low levels of 
literacy to accelerate learning.  
● 
Educators teach academic 
language and align to MA 
Framework content grade level 
standards and WIDA standards.  
● 
Classroom teachers collaborate and 
plan with ESL teachers.  
● 
Educators are bilingual and believe 
that the native language of 
students and families is an asset 
and promotes bilingual education.  
● 
Classroom environments are 
multicultural, engage diverse 
perspectives and experiences and 
value all students' cultural and 
linguistic backgrounds.  
● 
Student ILP (if needed) is aligned to 
WIDA Can Do and language 
domains.  
● 
ESL instructional pedagogy is 
connected thematically with a 
focus on academic language.  
● MASS 
Literacy 
Guide  
● MA DESE 
Collaboration 
Tool  
● Incorporating 
Native 
Language 
into Learning  
● BPS 
Equitable 
Literacy Look-
Fors  
● MA DESE ESL 
Model 
Curriculum 
Units  
● CGCS 3Ls: 
Learning, 
Language 
and Literacy  
● SFL Writing 
Pedagogy  
● UDL 
Guidelines  
● MA DESE’s 
Defining ESL 
Guidance  
SEI Language 
Specific Program - 
targeted for ML ELD 
1-3 with high 
incidence languages 
✓ ESL  
✓ SCI  
✓ NLS* 
SEI Inclusion 
Program - targeted 
for dually  
identified ML with 
ELD levels 1-3 and 
MLs with Disabilities 
✓ ESL  
✓ SCI  
✓ NLS* 
SEI Classrooms 
without district ELE 
Programs - targeted 
to ELD 4 and ELD 5 
and at all schools 
without an SEI 
Multilingual, 
Language Specific 
or SEI Inclusion 
Program  
 
✓ ESL  
✓ SCI  


Page 10:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 10 of 18 
 
 
 
Dual Language -  
targeted for MLs in 
ELD levels 1-3 and 
English monolingual 
students 
✓ ESL  
✓ SCI  
✓ NLI 
● 
Biliteracy skills that support each 
language and build metalinguistic 
awareness, such as teaching 
cognates.  
● 
Educators are bilingual and hold 
the belief that the native language 
of students and families is an asset.  
● 
Materials reflect authentic texts or 
are  
● 
transadapted with authors who 
reflect the linguistic and ethnic 
diversity of the target language.  
● 
The curriculum includes a 
standards-based scope and 
sequence for language and literacy 
development in English and the 
partner language for all students. 
 
● Dual 
Language 
CAL 
Guidance 
SLIFE - targeted for  
newcomer students 
with low native 
literacy  
assessments and 
gaps of education 
(Newcomer 
Program) 
✓ ESL  
✓ SCI  
✓ NLI  
✓ NLS * 
● 
Native language literacy and 
numeracy skills that develop 
students academically.  
● 
Appropriate developmental 
strategies and pedagogy that build 
on students’ schema and life 
experiences.  
● 
Educators are bilingual and hold 
the belief that the native language 
● SLIFE DESE 
Guidance 


Page 11:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 11 of 18 
 
of students and families is an asset.  
● 
Materials reflect authentic texts or 
are  
● 
transadapted with authors who 
reflect the linguistic and ethnic 
diversity of the target language.  
● 
Drawing on students’ cultures and 
identities with projects and life skills 
that connect to their communities 
and assets. 
Heritage Program -  
targeted for 
students with 
common ethnic and  
native language 
✓ NLI  
✓ ESL 
● 
Students from heritage 
backgrounds are taught target 
language across modalities aligned 
to World Language Standards.  
● 
Identity is often a major factor in 
heritage speakers/signers’ 
motivations for language learning, 
and educators must discuss identity 
issues to effectively support 
students in making the cultural 
connections described in world 
language content standards. 
● World 
Language 
Standards  
● Heritage 
Speakers' 
Guide 
 
 
MONITORING OF MULTILINGUAL LEARNERS INSTRUCTION  
In addition, this circular outlines the District's expectations for 
Central Office and school leaders regarding a quality monitoring 
system for ESL and content instruction for multilingual learners 
across English Learner Education (ELE) programs and general 
education settings. This system facilitates the District's 
identification of classrooms, programs, and schools of excellence 
so BPS can share these practices, trends and teaching pedagogy 


Page 12:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 12 of 18 
 
district-wide. In addition, routine observations will allow the 
District to identify schools and classrooms that need support for 
instructional improvement and, in some cases, intervention at a 
school, program, or classroom. The BPS monitoring system will 
ensure that students with an ILP are attended to with specific 
language goals.  
 
MONITORING OF ML INDIVIDUALIZED LEARNING PLANS (ILPS)  
Multilingual Learners that are not meeting targeted ACCESS 
progress benchmarks indicated by MA DESE are required to have 
Individual Learning Plans (ILP) (also known as a student success 
plan) that track their language growth and academic progress. 
Each year, OMME will share guidance, the list of students who 
need an ILP per DESE’s criteria, and the template document. 
LATFs will support the dissemination of information and these 
materials to teachers for completion. The ILPs should be 
completed by the student’s team of teachers, integrating how 
the student will grow across content areas. The use of the WIDA 
framework and Can Do descriptors guide the BPS ILP document 
so that the goals within each language domain of where a 
student needs to grow to move to the next level on the English 
language proficiency continuum are aligned with WIDA. A BPS 
ILP sample template can be found here.  
 
With the continued implementation of this policy, school leaders, 
LATFs and teachers are expected to:  
• Identify the areas in which identified MLs need 


Page 13:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 13 of 18 
 
improvement and establish personalized goals for 
attaining English proficiency;  
• Assess and track the progress of MLs who did not meet 
benchmarks in the identified areas in need of 
improvement;  
• Review resources and services available to assist MLs in 
the identified areas in need of improvement; and  
• Incorporate input from the parents or legal guardian of 
the identified ML.  
 
OMME is developing a systemic approach to monitoring ILPs for 
ML who have not met WIDA ACCESS Benchmarks as outlined 
below:  
• School leaders and LATFs will be notified and updated on 
the percentage of ILP completion, and OMME will 
monitor progress towards 100% completion of ILP plan;  
• ILPs should be finalized for students by October 15, 2023;  
• Schools principals and LATFs with incomplete ILPs will be 
notified by late October to follow-up; 
• Any remaining incomplete ILPs will be reflected on school 
EL plans;  
• OMME Equity and Accountability regional liaisons will 
work with school superintendents to ensure ILP 
completion for ML identified in need of a plan.  
 
MONITORING OF INSTRUCTION  
BPS recognizes that rigorous, standards-based, culturally 
affirming instruction is critical to student outcomes in our 


Page 14:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 14 of 18 
 
highest needs schools. The district will implement a consistent 
monitoring system to ensure ESL and content instruction for 
Multilingual learners and those with Disabilities receive high-
quality instruction and opportunities for accelerated learning 
across Equitable MTSS tiers.  
● The Office of Multilingual and Multicultural Education 
(OMME) is increasing staffing and instructional support in 
SY23/24 to support school leaders and educators in meeting 
consistent expectations for instructional practices for 
Multilingual Learners and those with disabilities. OMME 
multilingual instructional coaches will work to align 
instructional expectations from the district to classroom 
level with materials, role expectations, instructional 
practices, and coaching cycles.  
● OMME has adopted an updated MLs observation tool using 
the Equitable Literacy Self Reflection Tool and Learning, 
Language and Literacy observation tool with embedded 
practices that meet grade level content expectations for 
MLs. The updated MLs observation tool will be utilized 
district-wide to perform learning walks and observations 
across all ESL and content classrooms where MLs are placed 
in order to assess the quality of teaching and learning for 
Multilingual learners with a focus on Culturally and 
Linguistically Sustaining Practices (CLSP).  
● BPS district teams and schools will use the updated MLs 
observation tool replicated in Bullseye online platform for 
observers to input observation records in order to collect 
data, assess outcomes and monitor trends towards 


Page 15:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 15 of 18 
 
increased instructional improvements.  
● All district staff, school leaders and other classroom 
observers will be trained on the updated MLs observation 
tool via Bullseye online platform in order to implement 
across the system and leverage as a consistent routine 
classroom observation and monitoring tool.  
 
SCHOOL ACCOUNTABILITY  
The following outlines the District’s expectations for school 
leaders and central office regarding a quality monitoring system 
for ESL and content instruction for multilingual learners 
regardless of program or placement. It will ensure that we 
monitor schools for high-quality ML teaching practices and 
coherence across the district. OMME will add training for school 
leaders on ML instruction expectations and observation look-fors 
to better prepare them for appropriately evaluating and growing 
educators towards meeting proficient or exemplary status 
following the MA DESE Classroom Teacher Rubric.  
 
 


Page 16:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 16 of 18 
 
School leaders or assigned evaluators:  
a) Once every two weeks, school leaders are expected to 
do short observations (10-15 minutes) of all classrooms 
serving Multilingual Learners in the school. The school 
leaders should use the updated MLs observation tool to 
collect observation notes and align to district 
instructional vision.  
b) Within 48 hours of observations, school leaders should 
provide the classroom leaders with a quick note 
including a positive practice observed and a noticing or 
wondering to improve instructional practices. 
Resources aligned to expectations or improving 
instructional practices should be included with the 
noticings or wonderings.  
c) If any concerns arise from the short observation, the 
school leader should schedule an observation, 
including a one-on-one discussion with the teacher 
that offers resources, support, or coaching if available. 
d) When a school leader observes consistent classroom 
instruction below the expectations for teaching and 
learning, the school leader must have a conversation 
with the teacher and start the teacher improvement 
evaluation process. This should include expectations 
for improvement and resources to support the growth 
of the classroom staff.  
 


Page 17:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 17 of 18 
 
DISTRICT ACCOUNTABILITY  
Regional School Superintendents and District Regional Support 
Staff (District Team): 
a) Once a quarter, starting at the end of September, 
regional school superintendents and other district 
regional support staff will join school leaders to observe 
classroom practices in classrooms serving Multilingual 
Learners. The team will use the updated MLs 
observation tool to observe, record, and provide 
feedback on classroom instructional practices to 
identify trends and growth areas and monitor progress.  
b) Regional support staff conducting walkthroughs will 
be expected to record their observations in the 
centrally maintained Bullseye online platform. This will 
allow for district-wide analysis and monitoring of data 
trends. Additionally, school leaders and district staff will 
be able to monitor progress and share evidence to 
norm and validate observations.  
c) Regional school superintendents and regional support 
staff will debrief with school leaders on the day of the 
observations and discuss highlights of classroom 
instruction, how to grow pedagogically appropriate 
instructional practices, identify which instructional 
practices need support, and support is provided.  
d) Every quarter, the district team will monitor trends for 
evidence of improvement and areas of growth. The 
district team will be expected to coordinate central 


Page 18:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular EL-07 
Page 18 of 18 
 
office resources, including OMME coaches, and utilize 
data to support the classroom and school’s needs 
effectively.  
e) School superintendents will work with school leaders 
who have not demonstrated progress to develop an 
action plan for improving instruction with clear metrics 
that include district support and will be reflected in 
future QSP and on school leader evaluation.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
 
Owner:  
Deputy Superintendent of Academics and Interim 
Assistant Superintendent of OMME 
Departme
nt:  
Office of Multilingual and Multicultural Education 
(OMME) 
Mailing 
Address:  
Bolling Building, 2300 Washington Street, 6th 
Floor, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone:  
617-635-9435 
Email:  
OMMEequityteam@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


