Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
EQT-04 
Version 01  
 
 
 
TRANSGENDER AND GENDER NONCONFORMING 
STUDENTS  — NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF 
GENDER IDENTITY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
This circular sets out guidelines for schools and district staff to 
create a culture where transgender and gender nonconforming 
students feel safe, supported, and fully included, and to meet 
each school’s obligation to provide educational opportunities for 
all students. We aim to achieve inclusion of transgender and 
gender nonconforming students, while maintaining students’ 
right to privacy.  
BIAS-BASED CONDUCT, DISCRIMINATION, AND HARASSMENT 
Massachusetts law and the Boston Public Schools (BPS) require 
that all classrooms, programs, activities, and employment 
practices be free from bias and discrimination on the basis of sex, 
sexual orientation, and gender identity. It is the responsibility of 
each school and the district to ensure that transgender and 
gender nonconforming students have a safe school environment. 
For policies and procedures about BPS’s “Bullying Prevention 
and Intervention Plan,” please see Superintendent’s Circular SSS-


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-04 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 
 
18. For more information about safety transfers in the district, 
please see Superintendent’s Circular AMT-07.  
Reports of bias, discrimination or harassment based on a person’s 
actual or perceived gender identity or gender nonconformity are 
handled in the same manner as other reports of bias-based 
conduct. Students, employees, and third parties alleged to have 
violated this policy (EQT-04) will be investigated and addressed 
according to the protocols detailed in Superintendent’s Circular 
EQT-02, “Bias-Based Conduct Toward Students Families or Other 
Third Parties.” 
NAMES AND PRONOUNS 
In Massachusetts, an individual may adopt a name that is 
different from the name that appears on their birth certificate. No 
additional legal or other documentation is required for school 
staff to honor student requests to go by a chosen/affirming 
name. If a student or their family is looking to update the name 
that appears on official school records, they may do so either by 
completing the Change of Student Information Form - Name and 
Gender Change Request (if the update is related to gender 
identity) or by contacting BPS Welcome Services (if the update is 
not related to gender identity). Note: This process is not a legal 
name change and does not affect any records other than those 
kept by BPS.  
After a student requests a name change, school personnel shall 
make every effort to consistently use the student’s chosen name 
and stated pronouns. For students who remain in the same 
school following a gender transition, it is important to develop a 
plan for ensuring the use of the chosen name and stated 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-04 
Page 3 of 8 
 
 
 
pronouns. School-based staff are strongly encouraged to contact 
the Office of Equity for additional support in this process. 
PRIVACY, CONFIDENTIALITY, AND STUDENT RECORDS 
Under Massachusetts law, information about a student’s 
assigned birth sex, gender transition, name change associated 
with transition, medical or mental health treatment related to 
gender identity, or any other related information is part of the 
individual’s student record (for more information, see the 
Massachusetts Student Records Regulations, 603 CMR 23.00). 
Student records are confidential and must be kept private and 
secure except in limited circumstances, such as when authorized 
school personnel require the information to provide 
administrative, teaching, counseling, nursing, or other services to 
the student in the performance of their official duties. Authorized 
school personnel may include, but are not limited to, individuals 
such as the principal, school nurse, classroom teacher(s), social 
worker, and/or guidance counselor.  
When a student new to a school is using a chosen or affirming 
name, the birth name is considered private information and may 
be disclosed only with authorization as provided under the 
Massachusetts Student Records Regulations. If the student has 
previously been known at school and/or in school records by their 
birth name, school personnel must use the student’s chosen 
name. School personnel should not disclose information that 
may reveal a student’s transgender status or gender 
nonconforming presentation to others, including parents and 
other school personnel, unless legally required to do so, for safety 
reasons, or if the student and/or guardian has authorized such 
disclosure.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-04 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 
 
Transgender and gender nonconforming students have the right 
to discuss and express their gender identity and expression 
openly and to decide when, with whom, and how much 
information to share. A student who is 14 years of age or older, or 
who has entered the ninth grade, may consent to disclosure of 
information from their student record. If a student is under 14 
and is not yet in the ninth grade, only the student’s parent has 
the authority to decide on disclosures and other student record 
matters.  
To the extent that the school is not legally required to use a 
student’s legal name and gender on other school records or 
documents, every effort shall be made to update student records 
with the student’s chosen name and not circulate records with 
the student’s birth name. Records with the student’s birth name 
shall be kept confidential. 
For more information about Student Record Regulations, please 
see Superintendent’s Circular LGL-07.  
RESTROOMS, LOCKER ROOMS, AND CHANGING FACILITIES 
In accordance with Massachusetts law, all students are entitled to 
have access to restrooms, locker rooms, and changing facilities 
consistent with the student’s gender identity.  As part of the 
transition process, the school leader (or their designee) and 
student (and parent/guardian, when applicable) shall address the 
student’s access to the restrooms, locker room, and changing 
facilities.  
Each situation needs to be addressed based on the particular 
circumstances of the student and the school facilities. In all cases, 
the school leader (or their designee) shall be clear with the 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-04 
Page 5 of 8 
 
 
 
student (and parent/guardian when applicable) that the student 
may access the restroom, locker room, and changing facility that 
corresponds to the student’s gender identity. Transgender 
students who prefer not to use a sex-segregated restroom should 
be provided with a safe and adequate alternative, such as a single 
stall restroom or nurse’s restroom if possible. The single-user 
facility, however, may not be given as the only option for 
transgender or gender nonconforming students.  
School-based staff should be aware that there will be students 
who do not identify along the gender binary (boy/girl or 
man/woman). These students may use terms such as 
“nonbinary,” “gender fluid,” or “gender queer” to describe their 
gender identity. They should be given access to whichever facility 
feels most comfortable to them. Students who prefer not to use a 
sex-segregated restroom should be provided with a safe and 
adequate alternative, such as a single stall restroom or nurse’s 
restroom if possible. The single-user facility, however, may not be 
given as the only option for transgender or gender 
nonconforming students. If possible, schools should consider 
designating one or more restrooms at their school as “all gender,” 
meaning that anyone of any gender may use that restroom.  
Student and/or school staff discomfort is not an acceptable 
reason to deny restroom access to transgender and/or gender 
nonconforming students. School administrators, educators, and 
counseling staff should take a proactive approach to address any 
discomfort, foster understanding, and create a school culture 
that respects and values all students. School-based staff may 
contact the Office of Equity for additional support in this area. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-04 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 
 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION CLASSES, INTRAMURAL SPORTS, AND 
INTERSCHOLASTIC ATHLETIC ACTIVITIES 
Where there are sex-segregated classes or athletic activities, 
including intramural and interscholastic athletics, all students 
must be allowed to participate in a manner consistent with their 
gender identity. The Massachusetts Interscholastic Athletic 
Association, as outlined in their Gender Identity Policy 
Clarification, will defer to the determination made by the student 
and their school regarding gender identity.  
DRESS CODES 
All students have the right to dress in a manner consistent with 
their gender identity or expression. In general, schools should 
eliminate dress codes that restrict students’ clothing or 
appearance on the basis of gender.(1) School staff must not 
enforce the dress code more strictly against transgender and 
gender-nonconforming students than other students.  
DIPLOMAS 
Graduating students are entitled to use a chosen or affirming 
name on their BPS diploma, this name may be different from the 
name listed in student records. Students wanting a diploma 
printed with a name other than or in addition to the name listed 
in student records should speak to their school guidance 
counselor or the LGBTQ+ student support manager.   
 
(1) The Office of Equity will provide schools with a sample dress 
code upon request.  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-04 
Page 7 of 8 
 
 
 
GENDER-BASED ACTIVITIES, RULES, POLICIES AND PRACTICES 
Schools should evaluate all gender-based policies, rules, and 
practices, and maintain only those with a clear and sound 
pedagogical purpose and equivalent offerings for students of all 
genders. Gender-based policies, rules, and practices may have 
the effect of marginalizing, stigmatizing, and excluding students, 
including gender nonconforming students.  
Whenever students are separated by gender in school activities 
or are subject to an otherwise lawful gender-specific rule, policy, 
or practice, students must be permitted to participate in such 
activities or conform to such rule, policy, or practice consistent 
with their gender identity.  
RELATED RESOURCES 
• The Gay, Lesbian and Straight Education Network (GLSEN) 
Gender Terminology Guide is available here: 
https://www.glsen.org/activity/gender-terminology.  
• For information about the Boston Public Schools policies on 
bias-based conduct or bullying, see Superintendent’s 
Circulars EQT-02, EQT-03, or SSS-18. 
• For more information about the Massachusetts gender 
identity law, see the Massachusetts Department of 
Elementary and Secondary Education guidance document, 
“Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Gender Identity” at 
http://www.doe.mass.edu/ssce/GenderIdentity.pdf. 
• Contact the Office of Equity at 617-635-9650 or 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org for information about 
additional support. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-04 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Training and School Support 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., 5th floor, Roxbury, MA 
02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
Email: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


