Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
EQT-08 
Version 01 
 
 
 
EXPECTANT AND PARENTING STUDENTS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
BACKGROUND 
Boston Public Schools aims to graduate all students from high 
school and prepare them for college and career success. For 
students who are expecting or raising children, it is especially 
crucial to maintain high expectations and intensive support for 
school completion, as pregnancy and parenthood are among the 
primary reasons many students drop out of school. As a school 
district, Boston Public Schools aims to prevent student 
pregnancy through comprehensive health education and access 
to sexual health services. Under the District Wellness Policy, 
schools must provide students with access to key resources and 
services that are developmentally appropriate, and support 
sexual and reproductive health in a safe and supportive 
environment. It is also essential to engage with students who are 
currently expectant or parenting to ensure a safe and supportive 
learning environment and to promote academic success. 
Moreover, we must ensure compliance with district policies that 
prohibit bias-based conduct consistent with federal Title IX law, 
which prohibits discrimination against students who are 
pregnant or parenting. 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 2 of 28 
 
 
 
DEFINITIONS 
Expectant: an individual, regardless of gender identity, who 
is either pregnant or the partner of someone who is 
pregnant. 
Parenting: an individual, regardless of gender identity, who 
is the parent of a child. 
Caregiver: an individual currently providing care for the 
student who has completed the notarized “Caregiver 
Authorization Affidavit” granting education decision-making 
rights. 
Emancipated minor: an individual under age 18 who is self-
supporting and independent of parental control, sometimes 
as a result of a court order terminating the rights and duties 
of the parent(s). Under Massachusetts law, a minor who is 
pregnant or parenting is not automatically emancipated; 
however, as provided for in the law, pregnant and parenting 
students can give independent consent for medical or 
dental care for themselves or their children, including for 
school-based medical services (see M.G.L. Ch. 112 § 12F). 
FERPA (Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act): a 
federal law that affords parents the right to have access to 
their children’s education records, the right to seek to have 
the records amended, and the right to have some control 
over the disclosure of personally identifiable information 
from the education records. When a student turns 18 years 
old or enters a postsecondary institution at any age, the 
rights under FERPA transfer from the parents to the 
student. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 3 of 28 
 
 
 
HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act): a federal law establishing national standards and 
requirements for electronic health care transactions and 
protecting the privacy and security of individually 
identifiable health information. This law applies to health 
care providers and ensures that they do not share medical 
information about their patients without the patients’ 
permission. 
Gender identity: A person's internal sense of being male, 
female, some combination of male and female, or neither 
male nor female. A person’s gender identity can be the 
same or different from their physiology or assigned sex at 
birth. 
Parent: a child’s mother or father or both or guardian, or a 
person or agency legally authorized by a court order to act 
on behalf of the child in place of or in conjunction with the 
mother, father, or guardian. 
POLICY 
Maintaining Confidentiality 
Expectant and parenting students have the right to choose how 
and when they seek services and support from school staff. 
School staff must adhere to all applicable laws and regulations on 
confidentiality for students, including the requirements stated in 
the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA). As 
provided for by this law, expectant and parenting students have 
the right to have their health and personal information kept 
confidential, including from other students and school staff who 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 4 of 28 
 
 
 
are not required to be kept informed, except in circumstances 
involving their physical safety.  
When a student informs a school staff member of their expectant 
or parenting status, the staff member must inform their head of 
school within a reasonable time period as appropriate. A 
reasonable time period should be determined by the immediacy 
of the student’s need for an adjusted attendance policy and 
academic supports; for expectant students, sufficient time should 
be allowed for medical and health decisions to be made before 
sharing the student’s expectant status with the head of school. 
The staff member who has been informed must make the 
expectant or parenting student aware of the need to inform the 
head of school. The staff member should discuss with the 
student and determine a reasonable time period in which to 
inform the head of school. Depending on the details of the 
situation, the student’s preferences regarding confidentiality, and 
the student’s needs, the head of school should then share this 
information with other staff on a limited, need-to-know basis. 
School staff must not force or coerce a student to inform their 
parents, or any other individual, of any pregnancy or parenting-
related information. School staff must not disclose information 
about a student’s expectant or parenting status to the student’s 
parents without permission from the student. If information 
about a student’s pregnancy is documented within the student 
record of a student under the age of 18, and parents make a 
request for the student record, FERPA would require the district 
to present parents with an opportunity to view the student 
record. Boston Public Schools encourages communication with 
and involvement of parents/guardians/caregivers regarding 
health services and student supports. School staff working with 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 5 of 28 
 
 
 
expectant or parenting students should encourage students to 
consider informing their parents/guardians/caregivers or other 
trusted family members about the pregnancy and decisions 
related to that pregnancy.  
Nothing in this policy must prevent the disclosure of information 
in certain limited circumstances: cases of suspected child abuse 
or neglect (in accordance with laws on mandated reporting of 
abuse), threats by a minor against themselves or others, or cases 
where there is a serious risk to a minor’s life or health. A student’s 
pregnancy does not in itself constitute a serious risk to a minor’s 
life or health, and therefore does not compel a staff member to 
file a 51A based solely on the student’s pregnancy, regardless of 
the student’s age. 
A student must give written consent to store data linking their 
name with academic information and their expectant or 
parenting status. Storing this data together will help to ensure 
that the student is receiving coordinated academic support. 
Before giving this written consent, students must be informed 
that, if they consent, information about their expectant or 
parenting status may be accessible to their parents as part of 
their full academic records. Any aggregated or trend data on 
expectant or parenting students should not include any 
identifying information. Qualified medical professionals within a 
school building may keep confidential medical records on 
pregnant students who have sought treatment.  
Ensuring a Safe and Supportive Learning Environment 
BPS Equity circulars protect the rights of students, including 
expectant and parenting students, to attend school in an 
environment free of bias-based conduct. Regardless of their 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 6 of 28 
 
 
 
sexual orientation, gender identity, relationship status, marital 
status, race, ethnicity, immigration status, Special Education or 
English learner status, or other identities, expectant and 
parenting students have the same right as any other students to 
attend district schools or programs. District staff must not 
engage in bias-based conduct toward any expectant or 
parenting student, or exclude expectant or parenting students 
from any school, program, class, or extracurricular activity on the 
basis of a student’s expectant or parenting status. School staff are 
encouraged to bring an anti-racist lens to ensuring that 
expectant and parenting students be respected, provided with all 
needed supports, and actively encouraged to achieve their 
academic goals. 
School personnel may require an expectant or parenting student 
to obtain the certification of a physician that the student is 
physically and emotionally able to continue participation in such 
programs or activities only if a certification is also required of all 
other students with physical or emotional conditions requiring 
the attention of a physician. 
All school staff must maintain and communicate high academic 
expectations for all students, regardless of expectant or 
parenting status. Bias-based counseling and the use of materials 
that treat students differently on the basis of sex, including 
expectant or parenting status, are prohibited. 
The Office of Equity and administrators at each school are 
responsible for monitoring compliance with the provisions of this 
circular. Individuals who feel that this circular may have been 
violated or that they have been subject to bias-based conduct 
may contact the BPS Office of Equity. Any school employee who 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 7 of 28 
 
 
 
becomes aware of bias-based conduct against an expectant or 
parenting student must report such conduct to the head of 
school and/or to the Office of Equity. 
Finally, to promote a safe and supportive school environment, 
teachers and school staff must be sensitive to the health needs of 
expectant and parenting students. For example, some pregnant 
students may benefit from bringing snacks to class, taking extra 
bathroom breaks, or leaving class shortly before dismissal to 
allow more time to pass between classes. Schools must also 
accommodate new mothers’ need to express breastmilk and 
work with students in partnership with the Office of Equity to 
identify a private, sanitary location for this purpose, along with 
appropriate storage space for nursing equipment. 
Promoting Academic Success 
Expectant and parenting students have the right to remain in 
their regular or current school program, subject to universal 
participation requirements for those programs. School programs 
include but are not limited to: honors programs; special 
education placements; specialized language programs; 
alternative programs; extracurricular, intramural, and 
interscholastic activities; and graduation programs or activities. 
Students may attend an alternative school or participate in an 
alternative program or activity for expectant or parenting 
students, but such enrollment or participation must be 
completely voluntary and never coerced. The alternative school, 
program, or activity must align with the Common Core State 
Standards and the Massachusetts Curriculum Frameworks. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 8 of 28 
 
 
 
Implementing Attendance Policies 
Absences for reasons of pregnancy and related medical 
conditions, including pregnancy-related illness or health 
conditions, the termination of pregnancy, childbirth, and 
recovery therefrom, must be considered excused absences. 
Students have the right to be reinstated at the same school with 
the same status as before the leave began after any pregnancy-
related medical leave and/or parental leave. 
Students who are parents are entitled to a fair and reasonable 
parental leave following the birth of a new child. Students who 
are parents are entitled to a minimum of eight weeks of parental 
leave for the purpose of giving birth, although a school may not 
require a student to remain out of school for a fixed period of 
time post-childbirth. The amount of parental leave for each 
expectant student shall be determined in consultation with the 
student, school staff, the student’s health care providers, and any 
other adults the student consents to include. School staff should 
encourage students to consider including their 
parents/guardians/caregivers in this conversation. 
Documentation from students’ licensed healthcare providers 
may be required for verification of pregnancy and related 
medical conditions only if it is also required for absences due to 
other medical conditions. 
Absences due to the illness or medical appointment during 
school hours of a student’s child shall also be considered excused 
absences. Parenting students shall not be required to provide 
documentation from a licensed healthcare provider to verify their 
children’s illnesses unless such documentation is also required 
for absences due to all students’ medical conditions. 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 9 of 28 
 
 
 
Schools must support the continuation of learning during 
excused absences and leave, as medically appropriate. Every 
reasonable effort must be made to provide school and home-
based independent study activities for students who are or will 
be absent for a significant period of time due to pregnancy-
related illnesses, childbirth, and recovery, and parental leave. 
Students who are pregnant or parenting must have access to 
homebound or hospital instructional services on the same basis 
as any other student who misses school for a temporary medical 
condition.  
Students with excused absences due to their expectant or 
parenting status must have the same opportunity to complete 
assignments and tests missed, or an equivalent of the work 
missed, that any other student would have after excused 
absences. Students must be given full credit upon satisfactory 
completion of that work.  
Using Liaisons to Share Information 
Heads of school that oversee any student in grades 6-12 must 
identify a school liaison for the Expectant and Parenting Students 
Policy to help share information among the school community. 
Schools must submit the name of this liaison to the Health and 
Wellness Office. The liaison may be a guidance counselor, school 
nurse, social worker, or other school staff member. Should the 
expectant and parenting student liaison step down, a 
replacement must be identified and reported to the Health and 
Wellness Office within 15 school days. 
Liaisons will work with the school leadership and the School 
Wellness Council to share this policy with staff, students, and 
families. All schools within the district that include any grades 6-


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 10 of 28 
 
 
 
12 must disseminate this policy among school staff and 
administration. The policy must also be shared with students and 
families within the first month of school, and it must be posted in 
the school nurse’s office throughout the school year. The school 
must make the policy publicly available in any school-based 
health centers or health resource centers. The name of the 
expectant and parenting student liaison as well as a copy of this 
policy must also be posted on the school website. 
Heads of school are ultimately responsible for the academic 
success of their students. Therefore, school leaders must 
intervene in cases where students’ needs are not being met, 
especially when the action or inaction of school staff is a 
contributing factor. 
The Office of Health and Wellness will coordinate training for 
liaisons. That office must supply district and community 
resources to liaisons. Liaisons must make this information 
available to students and staff as needed. 
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 11 of 28 
 
 
 
POLICY IMPLEMENTATION AND REVIEW 
Central offices and departments (e.g., Opportunity Youth, Health 
Services, Health & Wellness), in collaborations with school 
superintendents, will work with schools where there are multiple 
expectant and parenting students, where existing support 
systems may not be adequate to support their needs, to help 
establish a plan for providing more comprehensive systems of 
support. For example, this could include creating a school-based 
team to develop and implement individual student plans, hiring a 
part-time student liaison to work with expectant and parenting 
students, or bringing in external programs or resources to 
support students. In all cases, the plan must be approved by the 
head of school and must match available school resources 
(particularly staff and budget). 
This policy and its associated implementation procedures will be 
reviewed annually by the Office of Equity and the Office of Health 
and Wellness and updated as needed. 
IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES & PROCEDURES 
Rights of Expectant and Parenting Students 
Expectant and parenting students have the right to: 
1. Choose how and when they seek services and support from 
school staff. 
2. Choose when and how to inform 
parents/guardians/caregivers or other trusted family 
members of their pregnancy and decisions related to that 
pregnancy. 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 12 of 28 
 
 
 
3. Have information shared with school personnel on a need-
to-know basis only, unless the student provides written, 
informed consent. 
a. In particular, students must give written, informed 
consent before information on their expectant or 
parenting status is stored in school files alongside their 
academic information. 
4. Participate in school programs, activities, classes, or 
extracurricular activities and remain in their regular or 
current school program, subject to universal participation 
requirements. 
a. Enrollment by expectant or parenting students in any 
alternative program or activity must be completely 
voluntary. 
5. Have their absences excused when due to the illness or 
medical appointment of a child or their own pregnancy-
related reasons. 
6. Complete assignments and tests missed, or an equivalent of 
the work missed, after excused absences due to their 
expectant or parenting status and receive full credit upon 
satisfactory completion of that work. 
7. Participate in a conference with school staff and health care 
providers about the amount of parental leave they will take, 
and to choose which other adults (including 
parents/guardians/ caregivers or other trusted family 
members), if any, to include in that conference. 
a. Students are entitled to a minimum of eight weeks of 
parental leave. 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 13 of 28 
 
 
 
b. BPS employees may not require a student to remain 
out of school for a fixed period of time post-childbirth. 
8. Receive Home and Hospital Instruction services to continue 
learning and obtain instruction during excused absences 
and/or leave that total more than 14 days in a school year. 
a. Students must provide a qualified physician's 
statement to access Home and Hospital Instruction 
services. 
9. Be reinstated at the same school at the conclusion of 
pregnancy and/or parental leave with the same status as 
before the leave began. 
Protecting Student Confidentiality 
1. Boston Public Schools employees must adhere to all 
applicable laws and regulations on confidentiality for 
students, including the requirements stated in the Family 
Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA). 
a. Obtain written, informed consent from expectant or 
parenting students before storing data linking 
students’ names with academic information and 
expectant or parenting status.   
b. Before giving written consent, students must be 
informed that, if they consent, information about their 
expectant or parenting status will be entered into their 
educational records to ensure that students are 
receiving necessary supports, and educational records 
are accessible to their parents in accordance with 
FERPA. 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 14 of 28 
 
 
 
2. When a student informs a school staff member of their 
expectant or parenting status, the staff member must 
inform their head of school within a reasonable time period 
as appropriate in order to provide coordinated academic 
support and adjusted attendance policies.  
a. A reasonable time period should be determined by the 
immediacy of the student’s need for an adjusted 
attendance policy and academic supports, balanced 
with the time needed by an expectant student to make 
personal health decisions before the head of school is 
informed.  
b. The staff member should explain to the student the 
need to inform the head of school in order to make a 
coordinated plan for academic success. The staff 
member should discuss with the student what a 
reasonable time period would be for them so there is a 
shared understanding and accountability of the next 
steps.  
c. If the student is pregnant and needs more time and 
support to consider their options and connect with a 
medical provider, the staff and student should make a 
plan to check in regularly to ensure the student 
receives timely support. The staff member is not 
required to inform the head of school if the pregnancy 
is ended. 
d. Depending on the details of the situation, the student’s 
preferences regarding confidentiality, and the 
student’s needs, the head of school should then share 
this information with other staff on a limited, need-to-
know basis. The school nurse may be helpful if health 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 15 of 28 
 
 
 
care coordination with the student’s medical provider 
is needed. A school social worker may be helpful in 
connecting the student to other support services. The 
student should be consulted before sharing their 
status with other staff; this is essential to building trust, 
honoring student autonomy, and ensuring the student 
feels safe and supported. 
3. School staff members must not disclose a student’s 
expectant or parenting status to that student’s parents 
regardless of age without permission from the student. 
Additionally, staff members must not force or coerce 
students to inform their parents, or any other individual, of 
any pregnancy or parenting-related information.  
a. School staff working with expectant or parenting 
students should encourage them to consider informing 
their parents/guardians/caregivers or other trusted 
family members of the pregnancy and decisions 
related to that pregnancy. Having a support system 
where they live is very important during pregnancy 
and while parenting. However, to help the student 
make a support plan, the trusted staff should ask if the 
student believes that telling their family about the 
pregnancy will put the student in danger and should 
be aware of such dynamics in the student’s home life. 
A school social worker, a trained reproductive health 
counselor, or a similar support role may be best suited 
to help counsel a student in this matter. 
b. In accordance with Massachusetts General Law 
(Chapter 119, Section 51A), school staff are expected to 
disclose information on child abuse or neglect to the 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 16 of 28 
 
 
 
appropriate authorities. Mandated reporters must 
report if, when acting in their professional capacities, 
they have reasonable cause to believe that a child is 
suffering certain kinds of physical or emotional injury. 
The kinds of physical or emotional injuries that must be 
reported are those that are the result of (i) abuse 
inflicted upon the child which causes harm or 
substantial risk of harm to the child's health or welfare, 
including sexual abuse; (ii) neglect, including 
malnutrition; or (iii) physical dependence upon an 
addictive drug at birth. A student’s pregnancy does not 
in itself constitute a serious risk to a minor’s life or 
health and does not automatically require submitting a 
report. 
4. School staff members should reach out to the school policy 
liaison, a school administrator, or the Office of Equity to get 
support in understanding confidentiality procedures as 
needed.  
Ensuring a Safe, Supportive Learning Environment  
BPS employees must: 
1. Treat all students, including expectant and parenting 
students, with respect, recognizing that all students have 
the potential to succeed. 
2. Maintain and communicate high academic expectations for 
all students, regardless of expectant or parenting status. 
3. Recognize and address the ways multiple forms of bias, 
inducing racial bias, may impact an expectant or parenting 
student’s opportunities for academic success. 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 17 of 28 
 
 
 
4. Ensure that expectant and parenting students are not 
excluded from any school, program, class, or extracurricular 
activity on the basis of the student’s expectant or parenting 
status. 
a. Teachers and school staff are encouraged to be 
sensitive to the health needs of expectant and 
parenting students. For example, some pregnant 
students may benefit from bringing snacks to class, 
taking extra bathroom breaks, or leaving class shortly 
before dismissal to allow more time to pass between 
classes.  
b. Schools must also accommodate new mothers’ need to 
express breast milk. Contact the Office of Equity for 
assistance as needed. 
5. Any BPS employee, student, or family member who 
becomes aware of possible bias-based conduct against an 
expectant or parenting student should report such conduct 
to the head of school and/or to the BPS Office of Equity. 
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
1. School administrators are responsible for: 
a. Ensuring school staff’s compliance with the policy. 
i. Intervene in cases where students’ needs are not 
being met, especially when the action or inaction 
of school staff is a contributing factor. 
b. Identifying a school policy liaison: Schools with any 
grades 6-12 must identify an Expectant and Parenting 
Student Policy liaison to share information with school 
staff, students, and families.  


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 18 of 28 
 
 
 
i. School leaders must submit the name of the 
policy liaison to the assistant superintendent, 
Office of Health & Wellness, by the first day of 
school each year. See contact at the end of the 
circular. 
ii. If the school’s policy liaison steps down, the school 
leader must identify a replacement and report 
their name to the Assistant Superintendent, Office 
of Health & Wellness, within 15 school days. 
iii. Every school has a different structure for 
providing student support services; therefore, the 
school-based position of the liaison may differ 
among schools. It is usually best if the liaison is in 
regular contact with expectant and parenting 
students as part of their job, such as a guidance 
counselor or social worker. At the K-8 or middle 
school level, where there are generally fewer 
expectant or parenting students, it may be 
appropriate for a health teacher or other 
interested teacher to serve as liaison. School 
nurses may not be the ideal choice as a liaison 
since they may not be available to leave the 
nurse’s office during school hours to share 
information with other staff. 
c. Overseeing the policy liaison to ensure communication 
of the policy to all staff, students, and families. 
d. Working with the Office of Equity to accommodate 
new mothers’ need to express breast milk by 
identifying a private, sanitary location for this purpose, 
along with appropriate storage space for nursing 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 19 of 28 
 
 
 
equipment. Bathrooms are not appropriate facilities, 
even if private. To qualify, spaces should be “shielded 
from view and free from any intrusion.” For more 
guidelines, see the fact sheet on “Break Time for 
Nursing Mothers Under the FLSA,” available at 
http://www.dol.gov/whd/regs/compliance/whdfs73.htm 
e. Reporting any instances of possible bias-based 
conduct against an expectant or parenting student to 
the Office of Equity (phone: 617-635-9650 or email: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org)  
i. It is considered bias-based conduct to exclude an 
expectant or parenting student from any school, 
program, class, or extracurricular activity on the 
basis of a student’s expectant or parenting status.  
ii. Enrollment by expectant or parenting students in 
any alternative program or activity must be 
completely voluntary. 
2. School Expectant and Parenting Student Policy liaisons are 
responsible for: 
a. Completing the initial district training for policy liaisons 
within the first few months of school, and any refresher 
training as required. The training objectives are to 
increase knowledge about the policy and related laws 
and improve skills in supporting expectant and 
parenting students and communicating with the 
school community. 
b. Ensuring that the policy is shared with students, 
families, and school staff. 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 20 of 28 
 
 
 
i. Work with the school leadership and the school 
wellness council to share the policy with staff, 
students, and families, ensuring translation for 
students and families whose primary language is 
not English. 
ii. Make the policy and any appropriate resources 
available in the school nurse’s office and any 
school-based health centers or health resource 
centers. 
iii. Post the name of the policy liaison and a copy of 
the policy on the school website so any member 
of the school community can access it. 
c. Disseminating information about district and 
community resources. 
i. Inform administrators, staff, and students about 
the availability of resources for expectant and 
parenting students; see Office of Health & 
Wellness for resources. 
ii. Disseminate information about support resources 
to expectant and parenting students directly as 
appropriate or through other school staff 
members as needed; students are not required to 
meet with the liaison if they do not wish.  
d. Supporting all school staff in maintaining student 
confidentiality as required by this policy and the law. 
i. Liaisons do not need to be informed of the 
identity of any expectant and parenting student 
unless the student chooses to inform the liaison; 
information and resources can be shared through 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 21 of 28 
 
 
 
the school staff member with whom the student 
has confided. 
ii. Liaisons are not expected to be case managers or 
counselors for expectant or parenting students 
unless this is already part of their job 
requirements. 
3. School nurses are responsible for: 
a. Offering regular check-ins with expectant students to 
monitor their health and wellness during their 
pregnancy. The type and frequency of check-ins should 
be established based on the student’s wishes, needs, 
and determined in consultation with the student. 
i. Health services should be provided in a safe and 
supportive environment free from bias-based 
conduct towards expectant or parenting students. 
b. Maintaining confidential medical records on pregnant 
or parenting students who have sought treatment. 
School nurses must be particularly aware of their 
responsibilities under state and federal law and 
regulations, especially the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA). 
c. Partnering with the head of school and the Office of 
Equity to accommodate new mothers’ need to express 
breast milk by identifying a private, sanitary location for 
this purpose, along with appropriate storage space for 
nursing equipment. Bathrooms are not appropriate 
facilities, even if private. To qualify, spaces should be 
“shielded from view and free from any intrusion.” For 
more guidelines, see the fact sheet on “Break Time for 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 22 of 28 
 
 
 
Nursing Mothers Under the FLSA,” available at 
http://www.dol.gov/whd/regs/compliance/whdfs73.htm 
d. Helping to determine the amount of parental leave a 
student will take following the birth of a child in 
consultation with the student, school staff who are 
already aware of the student’s expectant status, the 
student’s health care providers, and any other adults 
the student consents to include. 
i. Students are entitled to a minimum of eight 
weeks of parental leave. 
ii. BPS employees may not require a student to 
remain out of school for a fixed period of time 
post-childbirth. 
e. Posting the policy in the school nurse’s office 
throughout the school year and making the policy 
publicly available in any school-based health centers or 
health resource centers. 
 
4. Guidance counselors are responsible for: 
a. Providing expectant and parenting students with 
academic support and guidance when requested. 
Students should be encouraged to seek support from 
school guidance counselors to make an academic plan, 
but students have a right to choose how and when 
they seek services and support from school staff.  
i. Work with expectant and parenting students to 
determine a school schedule that promotes on-
time arrival and regular attendance. For some 


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 23 of 28 
 
 
 
students, this may include flexible scheduling, 
independent study periods, or online courses 
(provided that online courses include sufficient 
opportunities for in-person interaction and 
support as needed). 
b. Obtaining written, informed consent from expectant or 
parenting students before storing data linking 
students’ names with academic information and 
expectant or parenting status. Before giving written 
consent, students must be informed that, if they 
consent, information about their expectant or 
parenting status will be entered to ensure that 
students are receiving necessary support, and then 
may be accessible to their parents as part of their full 
academic records. 
c. Ensure that any counseling or information provided to 
students is unimpeded by bias. 
d. Ensure that any student’s decision about whether to 
participate in alternative schools, programs, or 
activities for expectant or parenting students is 
completely voluntary if sharing information with 
students about those programs. 
e. If a school does not have a guidance counselor on staff, 
these responsibilities fall to the head of school. 
5. The student’s school leader or their designee is responsible 
to: 
a. Bring together the student, other school staff already 
aware of the student’s expectant or parenting status, 
the student’s health care providers, and any other 


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 24 of 28 
 
 
 
adults the student consents to include to determine 
the amount of parental leave for each expectant 
student. Encourage students to consider including 
their parents/guardians/caregivers in this conversation. 
i. Students are entitled to a minimum of eight 
weeks of parental leave. 
ii. BPS employees may not require a student to 
remain out of school for a fixed period of time 
post-childbirth. 
b. Ensure that students are reinstated at the conclusion 
of a pregnancy and/or parental leave with the same 
status as before the leave began. 
c. Support the continuation of learning during excused 
absences and leave, as medically appropriate, including 
by working with the student to arrange a temporary 
home or hospital instructional services through the 
BPS Opportunity Youth Department. 
d. Work with expectant and parenting students to 
determine a school schedule that promotes on-time 
arrival and regular attendance. Contact the Homeless 
Education Resource Network (HERN) to arrange 
transportation and promote school attendance among 
expectant or parenting students experiencing 
homelessness who are residing outside of the district. 
e. Ensure that absences are excused when they arise 
from pregnancy and related medical conditions, 
including pregnancy-related illness or health 
conditions, the termination of pregnancy, childbirth, 
and recovery therefrom. Documentation from 


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 25 of 28 
 
 
 
students’ licensed healthcare providers may be 
required for verification of pregnancy and related 
medical conditions only if it is also required for 
absences due to other medical conditions. 
f. Ensure that absences are considered excused when 
they are due to the illness or medical appointment 
during school hours of a child of a student. 
6. Central Office Staff 
a. Office of Health and Wellness is responsible for: 
i. Tracking names of school-based policy liaisons  
ii. Coordinating initial and any needed refresher 
training resources for policy liaisons. The training 
will include best practices on disseminating 
information about the expectant and parenting 
students policy, on finding and distributing 
resources to students in a culturally responsive 
way, and on expectations for data collection and 
confidentiality. 
iii. Maintaining up-to-date district and community 
resources for supporting expectant and parenting 
students and sharing these resources with 
liaisons. 
b. Office of Equity is responsible for:  
i. Monitoring compliance with this policy, including 
responding to reports of possible bias-based 
conduct. 
ii. Ensuring communication of the policy at every 
level of staff within the district and 


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 26 of 28 
 
 
 
communicating the policy yearly to families 
through the BPS Guidebook. 
iii. Reviewing the policy and its associated 
implementation procedures annually and 
updating as needed in collaboration with the 
Office of Health and Wellness and other central 
office stakeholders identified in this policy. 
iv. Sharing the expectant and parenting students 
policy and policy updates with the Boston 
Student Advisory Council and other student 
groups. 
c. The Department of School Health Services is 
responsible for: 
i.  Providing training and guidance to school nurses 
on best practices for working with expectant and 
parenting students, including how to ensure 
confidentiality in accordance with this policy and 
the law and providing culturally responsive 
services. 
d. Office of Opportunity Youth is responsible for:  
i. Working with schools to help support the 
continuation of learning during excused absences 
and leave through the Home and Hospital 
Instruction Program.  
ii. Through supervisors of attendance, responding to 
inquiries about attendance policies or reporting, 
including policies on excused absences for 
expectant and parenting students. 


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 27 of 28 
 
 
 
iii. Through the Homeless Education Resource 
Network (HERN), working with schools to arrange 
transportation and promote school attendance 
among expectant or parenting students 
experiencing homelessness who are residing 
outside of the district. 
e. Central office departments tasked with student 
support services, such as Guidance and Social Work, 
are responsible for: 
i.  Supporting the communication of this policy to 
the school-based staff they support and 
supporting professional development to ensure 
staff is trained and have the resources to support 
expectant and parenting students.  
ii. Identifying schools with large numbers of 
expectant and parenting students, such that 
existing support systems may not be adequate to 
support their needs and helping to establish a 
plan for providing more comprehensive systems 
of support. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Training and School Support 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 5th Floor, Roxbury, 
MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Email: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org 


Page 28:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-08 
Page 28 of 28 
 
 
 
OR 
Name: 
Senior Executive Director 
Department: 
Office of Health & Wellness 
Mailing Address: 
370 Columbia Rd., Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-7926 
Email: 
healthandwellness@bostonpublicschools. 
org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


