Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
EQT-07 
Version 01 
 
 
 
ACCOMMODATING EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES, 
PREGNANCY, AND PREGNANCY-RELATED CONDITIONS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to providing equal 
employment opportunity to all individuals, in accordance with 
Chapter 151B of the Massachusetts General Laws and with the 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). This circular provides 
information about the district procedures to address 
accommodation requests for employees on the basis of disability, 
pregnancy, and pregnancy-related conditions.  
EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES 
Any current or prospective employee who is an individual with a 
disability may request a reasonable accommodation to assist in 
performing the essential functions of their assignment. 
Chapter 151B and the ADA define a person with a disability as 
someone who: (1) has a physical or mental impairment that 
substantially limits one or more major life activities; (2) has a 
record of such an impairment; or (3) is regarded as having such 
an impairment.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-07 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 
 
Major life activities include, but are not limited to, caring for 
oneself, performing manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, 
sleeping, walking, standing, lifting, bending, speaking, breathing, 
learning, reading, concentrating, thinking, communicating, and 
working, and the operation of a major bodily function. Although 
not exhaustive, examples of the range and variety of disabilities 
included under these laws are provided below.  
• Non-Ambulatory Disabilities – Physical impairments, 
regardless of cause, that require an individual to use a 
wheelchair, including individuals who are paraplegic, 
quadriplegic, hemiplegic, or have had a limb or limbs 
amputated. 
• Semi-Ambulatory Disabilities – Physical impairments that 
cause a person to walk with difficulty, perhaps with the 
assistance of a cane, crutches, or walker. 
• Coordination Disabilities – Impairments of muscle control of 
the limbs. 
• Sight Disabilities – Impairments affecting vision totally or 
partially. 
• Hearing Disabilities – Impairments affecting hearing totally 
or partially. 
• Speech Impairments – Impairments affecting totally or 
partially the ability to communicate orally. 
• Learning Disabilities – Impairments that impede learning 
processes. 
• Mental or Psychological Disorders – Impairments affecting 
individuals’ neurological and/or psychological functioning, 
behavior, and/or mood. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-07 
Page 3 of 6 
 
 
 
The district’s nondiscrimination policy prohibits bias-based 
conduct or discrimination on the basis of disability in any aspect 
of the employment relationship, including: 
1. 
Recruitment, advertising, and the processing of 
applications 
2. 
Hiring, evaluation, upgrading, promotion, award of 
permanent teacher status, demotion, transfer, layoff, 
termination, right of return from layoff, and rehiring 
3. 
Rates of pay or any other form of compensation, and 
changes in compensation 
4. 
Job assignments, job classifications, organizational 
structures, position descriptions, lines of progression, 
and seniority lists 
5. 
Leaves of absence, sick leave, or any other leave 
6. 
Fringe benefits available by virtue of employment, 
whether or not administered by the Boston Public 
Schools 
7. 
Selection and financial support for training, including 
professional development, conferences, and other 
related activities, and selection for leave of absence to 
pursue training. 
PREGNANCY AND PREGNANCY-RELATED CONDITIONS 
As of April 1, 2018, any current or prospective employee who is 
pregnant or has a pregnancy-related condition, such as lactation 
or the need to express breast milk, may request a reasonable 
accommodation to assist in performing the essential functions of 
their assignment.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-07 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 
 
If an employee requests an accommodation for: (1) more frequent 
restroom, food, or water breaks; (2) seating; (3) limits on lifting no 
more than 20 pounds; and (4) private, non-bathroom space for 
expressing breast milk, no medical documentation 
accompanying such a written request is necessary. Other 
accommodation requests may require supporting medical 
documentation or information.  
Employees who are pregnant or have pregnancy-related 
conditions may contact the Office of Equity to begin the 
accommodations process.  
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION PROCESS 
A “reasonable accommodation” is any modification or 
adjustment to a job or work environment that allows an 
applicant or employee with a disability, pregnancy, and 
pregnancy-related conditions to participate in the job application 
process, perform the essential functions of a job, or enjoy benefits 
and privileges of employment equal to those enjoyed by 
employees. Upon receiving a request for a reasonable 
accommodation, the Boston Public Schools will engage in an 
interactive dialogue process. The district will attempt to provide 
reasonable accommodations unless it would cause an undue 
hardship or fundamentally alter the district’s programs.  
Any applicant or employee seeking reasonable accommodations 
on the basis of a disability, pregnancy, and pregnancy-related 
conditions may contact the Office of Equity to begin the process. 
Information an employee chooses to submit during the 
accommodation process, such as relevant medical 
documentation, will be kept confidential to the extent 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-07 
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
 
practicable. Information collected in the reasonable 
accommodation process will be kept in a confidential file with 
the Office of Equity.  
Your cooperation in implementing a policy of nondiscrimination 
against persons with disabilities will assist the Boston Public 
Schools in ensuring equal opportunity for all employees and 
potential employees. 
STATE AND FEDERAL REMEDIES 
If you believe you have been subjected to unlawful discrimination 
on the basis of disability, pregnancy, and pregnancy-related 
conditions, you may file a formal complaint with either of the 
government agencies set forth below. Using BPS' internal 
reporting process does not prohibit you from also filing a 
complaint with these agencies. These agencies have a short time 
period for filing a claim (300 days from the most recent act of 
alleged discrimination). 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) 
John F. Kennedy Federal Building 
475 Government Center 
Boston, MA 02203 
Phone: 1-800-660-4000 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-07 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 
 
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (MCAD) 
Office Location: 
Address: 
Boston 
One Ashburton Place, Room 601 
Boston, MA 02108 
(617) 994-6000 
Springfield 
436 Dwight Street, Suite 220 
Springfield, MA 01103 
(413) 739-2145 
New Bedford 
 
800 Purchase Street, Room 501 
New Bedford, MA 02740  
(508) 990-2390 
Worcester 
484 Main Street, Room 320 
Worcester, MA 01608 
(508) 453-9630 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Accommodations in the Office of 
Equity 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
E-mail: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


