Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
EQT-06 
Version 01 
 
 
 
SEXUAL MISCONDUCT TOWARD EMPLOYEES AND 
OTHER THIRD PARTIES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to ensuring a work 
environment free of inappropriate sexual conduct. Inappropriate 
sexual comments or behavior will not be tolerated. In addition, 
any retaliation against an individual who reports inappropriate 
sexual conduct or harassment, or has cooperated with a related 
investigation, is unacceptable. The Boston Public Schools treats 
reports of violations of this policy with the utmost seriousness. 
We will respond promptly to any allegations of sexually 
inappropriate conduct and intervene to cease any conduct that 
violates this policy. Anyone who violates this policy will be subject 
to corrective action up to and including termination.  
DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT 
In Massachusetts, sexual harassment means sexual advances, 
requests for sexual favors, and verbal or physical conduct of a 
sexual nature when: 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-06 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
 
a) Submission to or rejection of such advances, requests, or 
conduct is made, either explicitly or implicitly, a term or 
condition of employment or as a basis for employment 
decisions; or 
b) Such advances, requests, or conduct have the purpose or 
effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual’s work 
performance by creating an intimidating, hostile, 
humiliating, or sexually offensive work environment. 
Please note that while this policy sets forth the goal of promoting 
a workplace that is free of harassment, the policy is not designed 
or intended to limit the district’s authority to discipline or take 
remedial action for workplace conduct that the district deems 
unacceptable, regardless of whether the conduct satisfies the 
definition of unlawful harassment. 
The definition of inappropriate sexual communication and 
behavior is broad. Conduct that is sexual or perceived as sexual, 
and that is welcome or unwelcome, may constitute sexual 
harassment. 
CONDUCT PROHIBITED 
Employees shall not engage in inappropriate sexual conduct 
while employed, working for, attending, or participating in 
district endeavors. Employees are protected from inappropriate 
sexual conduct by anyone they interact with in the course of their 
work. The same standard applies to partners or contractors 
providing services in or under the auspices of the Boston Public 
Schools. Behavior that occurs in a location other than a Boston 
Public Schools building or outside of BPS school or work hours, 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-06 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
 
including when an employee is working remotely, may still 
constitute sexual misconduct and a violation of this policy if that 
behavior has the effect of disrupting an employee’s ability to do 
their job. 
While it is not possible to list all circumstances that may 
constitute prohibited conduct, the following are some examples: 
VERBAL: Using suggestive, derogatory, vulgar comments, or 
sexual innuendos or slurs; making unwanted sexual advances, 
invitations, and/or comments; repeatedly requesting dates; 
spreading rumors about or rating others as to their sexual activity 
or performance; making threats or pressuring others to submit to 
sexual requests; inquiring into one’s sexual activities or 
orientation.  
VISUAL: Displaying sexually suggestive objects, pictures, posters, 
written material, cartoons, or drawings; texting, emailing, or 
sharing digital images or comments of a sexual nature; using 
sexual gestures. 
PHYSICAL: Sexual activity, whether or not it is consensual, in a 
school or any building where BPS business is conducted. 
Participating in unwanted touching, pinching, kissing, hugging; 
blocking normal movement; stalking; engaging in unwanted 
sexual acts or assault; physically interfering with an individual’s 
work because of their actual or perceived sex, sexual orientation, 
gender identity, or gender expression. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-06 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
 
RESPONDING TO REPORTS OF SEXUAL MISCONDUCT  
An employee who believes that they have been a target of 
inappropriate sexual conduct may report the incident to any of 
the following individuals: school principal/head of school, school 
superintendent, or the Office of Equity.  
1. If an employee believes that they have been subjected to 
inappropriate sexual conduct or have witnessed 
inappropriate sexual conduct, the employee has the right to 
file a report with the Boston Police.  
2. The aggrieved employee also has the right to file a report 
with the Boston Public Schools Office of Equity, either orally 
or in writing, at 617-635-9650 or 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org.  
3. Employees in supervisory or managerial roles have an 
obligation to report any employee complaint of sexual 
misconduct to the Office of Equity within two (2) business 
days of learning of the complaint. The person submitting 
the report must ensure the integrity and confidentiality of 
the report and shall not disclose the allegations or any 
related information to either party or to any third party, 
excepting the Office of Equity, unless required by law. 
Employees in a supervisory capacity are required to report 
possible sexual misconduct toward or involving employees, 
vendors, or contractors to the Office of Equity as soon as 
practicable, generally within the same school day. 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-06 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
 
After a report is filed, the Office of Equity or the office’s designee 
will promptly investigate the allegation in a fair and expeditious 
manner. The investigation may include a private interview with 
the person filing the report, the person alleged to have engaged 
in sexually inappropriate conduct, and other witnesses. In some 
circumstances, as determined by the Office of Equity, the person 
alleged to have engaged in the conduct may be placed on 
administrative leave pending the outcome of the investigation. 
BPS employees are obliged to cooperate with the investigation, 
including promptly participating in investigatory interviews, and 
providing any requested information or documents. 
If Boston Public Schools finds that there has been a violation of 
this policy, the district will take action to eliminate the conduct. 
Disciplinary action for employees may include warnings, 
reprimands, required training, suspension or termination of 
employment, or other discipline as appropriate.  
When the investigation is completed, the Office of Equity will 
inform the reporter and the person alleged to have engaged in 
the conduct of the results of the investigation to the extent 
appropriate under the circumstances. 
PROHIBITION OF RETALIATION 
Retaliation against an individual who reports inappropriate 
sexual conduct, sexual harassment, or retaliation against 
individuals for cooperating with an investigation of a sexual 
harassment allegation is unlawful and will not be tolerated by the 
Boston Public Schools. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-06 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
 
STATE AND FEDERAL REMEDIES 
If you believe you have been subjected to unlawful sexual 
harassment, you may also file a formal complaint with either of 
the government agencies set forth below. Using the district’s 
internal reporting process does not preclude you from filing a 
complaint with these agencies. Each agency has a short time 
period for filing a claim (300 days). 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) 
John F. Kennedy Federal Building 
475 Government Center 
Boston, MA 02203 
(800) 660-4000 
 
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (MCAD) 
Office Location: 
Address: 
Boston 
One Ashburton Place, Room 601 
Boston, MA 02108 
(617) 994-6000 
Springfield 
436 Dwight Street, Suite 220 
Springfield, MA 01103 
(413) 739-2145 
New Bedford 
 
800 Purchase Street, Room 501 
New Bedford, MA 02740  
(508) 990-2390 
Worcester 
484 Main Street, Room 320 
Worcester, MA 01608 
(508) 453-9630 
For more information about this circular, contact: 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-06 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
 
Owner: 
Director of Training and School Support 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650  
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
E-mail: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


