Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
EQT-02 
Version 01 
 
 
 
BIAS-BASED CONDUCT TOWARD STUDENTS, FAMILIES, 
OR OTHER THIRD PARTIES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
PURPOSE 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to maintaining an 
environment free of bias and discrimination where all students 
can flourish, and all families are welcome and able to engage fully 
as partners in students’ education.  
The Boston Public Schools utilizes the procedures outlined in this 
circular to investigate and resolve reports of alleged violations of 
the district’s nondiscrimination policy (see EQT-01) that are 
targeted at students, families, or other third parties. These 
procedures are designed to facilitate a prompt and effective 
internal review and resolution of allegations of bias-based 
conduct or discrimination based on race, color, age, disability, 
sex/gender, gender identity, religion, national origin, ancestry, 
retaliation, sexual orientation, genetics, natural or protective 
hairstyle, military status, or homelessness. The intent of these 
procedures is to ensure that, to the greatest extent possible, 
reports of bias-based conduct are resolved in a constructive 
manner. 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
 
Employees of the Boston Public Schools who become aware of 
any possible bias-based conduct toward or involving students 
must report the incident or concern to their school leader, 
supervisor, and/or the Office of Equity as soon as practicable, 
generally within the same school day. The same standard applies 
to partners or contractors providing services in or under the 
auspices of the Boston Public Schools. 
COVERAGE 
The procedures pertain solely to reports explicitly alleging bias-
based conduct related to race, color, age, disability, sex/gender, 
gender identity, pregnancy, religion, national origin, ancestry, 
retaliation, sexual orientation, genetics, natural or protective 
hairstyle, military status, or homelessness. This applies to 
allegations of discrimination, harassment, or bias-based bullying 
in any activity under the auspices of the Boston Public Schools, 
including, but not limited to: 
• Admission  
• Provision and accessibility of programs and services  
• Guidance practices 
• Participation in sporting events or other extracurricular 
activities. 
 
Examples of unacceptable conduct include treating students 
differently because of their membership in a protected group, 
such that the treatment interferes with or limits the student’s 
ability to participate in or benefit from an educational 
opportunity or extracurricular program. Bias-based conduct also 
includes derogatory verbal, written, print, or digital 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
 
communication or conduct relating to a student’s membership in 
a protected category. Any form of communication or physical 
action that creates an intimidating, threatening, or abusive 
educational environment will not be tolerated. 
Such conduct may originate with students as well as employees 
and may also be caused by other persons who participate, 
observe, or otherwise engage in a district-sponsored activity. 
Behavior that occurs in a location other than a Boston Public 
Schools building or outside of BPS school or work hours may still 
constitute bias-based conduct and a violation of this policy if that 
behavior has the effect of disrupting a student's ability to learn. 
Examples of inappropriate behavior toward students that may 
violate this policy include:  
• Speaking or otherwise communicating derisively to or about 
a student or parent because of their membership in a 
protected group, such as their race, including the use of 
slurs 
• Telling or digitally circulating jokes that are derisive toward 
members of a particular group, such as a student of a 
particular religious faith  
• Using insulting nicknames for members of a protected 
group, such as a female student 
• Refusing to allow students to participate in any activity 
because of their membership in a protected group, such as 
their sexual orientation, and in the absence of a legitimate 
nondiscriminatory reason for the refusal  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
 
• Disciplining a student more frequently or more harshly 
because of their membership in a protected group, such as 
their national origin 
• Displaying pictures or taking any action that is derisive to 
any student based on their membership in a  
• Refusal to use the gender identity affirming name and/or 
pronouns that a student has stated. 
Students sometimes experience “microaggressions”: verbal or 
nonverbal communication that is rooted in implicit bias but does 
not rise to the level of a violation of this circular. Examples 
include: 
• Mistaking one student for another because they share the 
same racial identity 
• Complimenting a student for having a skill that is counter to 
a stereotype regarding their gender or ethnicity 
• Assuming a student observes a particular religious holiday 
or has a particular sexual orientation 
• Asking a student about their disability without their 
consent.  
When microaggressions are reported to the Office of Equity, the 
Office will partner with the student, family, and appropriate 
school staff to determine an effective intervention, such as 
coaching, mediation, restorative justice, or individual, classroom, 
or school-wide instruction or training.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
 
 
GENERAL POLICIES 
1. Retaliation against any student, family member, or other 
third party for reporting or participating in any way in the 
reporting or investigative procedure is strictly prohibited. 
2. Whenever possible, investigatory meetings will be 
scheduled during a mutually convenient time that does 
not conflict with regularly scheduled school programs. 
3. Reporting a possible violation will not be construed as 
reflecting unfavorably on a student, family member, or 
other third party’s good standing, academic performance, 
loyalty, or desirability to the Boston Public Schools. 
4. Information regarding the allegations, including the 
parties involved in the report and the investigation, will 
be kept confidential to the extent practicable. 
5. In determining whether the alleged conduct constitutes a 
violation of the BPS nondiscriminatory policy, the 
Superintendent or their designee will consider the 
surrounding circumstances, the nature of the behavior, 
the relationships between the parties involved, and the 
context in which the alleged incidents occurred. A 
determination whether a particular action or incident 
constitutes a violation of the policy will be based on all 
the facts. 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
 
PROCEDURES 
I. Reports to School Leaders 
Students, families, and other third parties are encouraged to 
report concerns regarding bias-based incidents of any kind 
to their school’s principal or headmaster. It is advised to file 
this report as close to the time of the incident as possible, as 
matters are generally more easily resolved the sooner they 
are reported.  
The principal or headmaster (or their designee) will attempt 
to work with the individual(s) to resolve the matter. They will 
contact the Office of Equity to ensure that any next steps 
are carried out in partnership with the Office of Equity and 
appropriately documented. 
Students, families, or other third parties who do not wish to 
seek assistance from their school’s principal or headmaster, 
or who are dissatisfied with the principal’s or headmaster’s 
attempt at resolution, may report their concerns directly to 
the Office of Equity. Nothing in this policy shall prevent a 
student, family member, or other third party from reporting 
a concern directly to the Office of Equity. 
II. Reports to the Office of Equity 
1. A member of the Office of Equity staff will ask the 
reporter for information regarding the incident(s) and 
may request that the reporter submit a written 
statement. The Office of Equity will ensure that assistance 
is provided in preparing such a written statement, if 
needed. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
 
2. After a report is received, the Office of Equity will notify 
the appropriate school leader(s) and/or the individual 
about whom the report has been filed, as appropriate. 
3. The Office of Equity will conduct a fair, impartial, 
thorough, and prompt review of the reported incident(s) 
and investigate as needed. Any investigation may include 
interviews with individuals who have pertinent 
information, and review of any documents or other 
information relevant to the investigation. BPS employees 
and students are obligated to cooperate with any Equity 
investigation, including promptly providing any 
requested information or documents.  
4. The individual who reported alleged bias-based conduct 
and any subjects of the investigation will generally be 
informed when the investigation is complete and 
whether prohibited conduct was found. Depending on 
the facts gathered, the Office of Equity may resolve the 
concerns by applying approaches such as alternative 
dispute resolution, restorative justice, training, or 
coaching. In other instances, the results of the 
investigation may also be documented as written 
findings.  
5. The Office of Equity will maintain records of all reports of 
bias-based conduct made to the Office of Equity, noting 
the school or department in which the alleged incident(s) 
occurred, the person accused, and the results of the 
investigation. The Office of Equity may review its records 
to identify any patterns and take appropriate action as 
necessary.  
The Office of Equity will: 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
 
1. Take seriously all concerns regarding possible bias-based 
conduct. 
2. Take necessary steps to end any conduct determined to 
be in violation of the district’s nondiscrimination policy 
and prevent this conduct from recurring in the future.  
3. Refer individuals found to have violated the district’s 
nondiscrimination policy for disciplinary action when 
appropriate.  
For employees, such action may include written warning, 
suspension, termination, or another action deemed 
appropriate under the circumstances. (For more 
information about Employee Discipline Procedures, 
please see Superintendent Circular HRS-PP10.) 
For students, such action may include suspension, 
expulsion, or another action deemed appropriate under 
the circumstances. (For more information on student 
discipline, please see the Code of Discipline for Students 
and Students with Disabilities – Superintendent Circulars 
SUP-05 and SPE-15.)  
4. Require students, employees, or other third parties found 
to violate the district’s nondiscrimination policy to attend 
Equity protocols and/or bias prevention training, as 
appropriate. 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
 
STATE AND FEDERAL REMEDIES 
Using the BPS Equity reporting process does not prohibit you 
from also filing a complaint with a state or federal agency. These 
agencies have a short time period for filing a claim (OCR – 180 
days; DESE – within the same school year; MCAD – 300 days). 
 For incidents involving students’ civil rights: 
United States Department of Education Office for Civil 
Rights (OCR) 
John W. McCormack Post Office and Courthouse  
5 Post Office Square, 8th Floor, Suite 900, Boston, MA 02109 
 
(617) 289-0111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 For concerns regarding students’ equitable access to 
education: 
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education (DESE) 
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02108 
(781) 388-3300 
 
 For concerns regarding civil rights related to food and 
nutrition (school-provided meals): 
U.S. Department of Agriculture Office of the Assistant 
Secretary for Civil Rights  
1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250 
 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-02 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 
 For incidents regarding employees’ civil rights: 
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (MCAD) 
 
Office Location: 
Address: 
Boston 
One Ashburton Place, Room 601 
Boston, MA 02108 
(617) 994-6000 
Springfield 
436 Dwight Street, Suite 220 
Springfield, MA 01103 
(413) 739-2145 
New Bedford 
 
800 Purchase Street, Room 501 
New Bedford, MA 02740  
(508) 990-2390 
Worcester 
484 Main Street, Room 320 
Worcester, MA 01608 
(508) 453-9630 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Compliance and Title IX 
Coordinator 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
Email: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


