Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
EQT-01 
Version 01 
 
 
 
NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to maintaining an 
educational environment and workplace where individuals of all 
backgrounds and experiences are welcomed, encouraged, 
included, and can flourish. We aim to eliminate all forms of bias 
and bigotry, including discrimination based on race, color, age, 
criminal record (inquiries only), physical or mental disability, 
pregnancy and pregnancy-related conditions, homelessness, 
sex/gender, gender identity, religion, national origin, ancestry, 
sexual orientation, genetics, natural or protective hairstyle, and 
military status. The Boston Public Schools is resolved that 
prejudice and disparate treatment will never impede our learners 
or our educators. 
The Boston Public Schools will not tolerate discriminatory 
behavior, including intimidation, threats, or harassment of 
employees, students, or anyone else who visits or is part of our 
learning community. Retaliatory conduct toward persons who 
have reported possible bias, discrimination, or inappropriate 
behavior, who have assisted in an investigation, or who have 
otherwise exercised their rights under this policy is also 
prohibited. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-01 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
 
Conduct in violation of this policy includes any action, including 
verbal or nonverbal communication, that contributes to, 
promotes, or is complicit in disrupting the district’s inclusive 
learning and working environment. Derogatory or intimidating 
statements, threats, acts of exclusion, or other mistreatment 
regarding a student’s or employee’s membership in or 
association with a member of a protected group, whether made 
in person or by telephone, postal mail, e-mail, internet posting, or 
any other means, will not be tolerated. This includes such 
statements made toward students, members of students’ 
families, employees, contractors, or other parties who support or 
participate in district programming. 
This policy extends to all employment and educational practices 
and programs, including: 
• Recruitment 
• Selection and admission 
• Compensation and benefits 
• Access to learning 
• Professional development, training, and extracurricular 
activities 
• Discipline, evaluation, and testing 
• Reasonable accommodation for disabilities or religious 
practices 
• Promotion 
• Transfer 
• Termination 
• Layoff 
• Other terms and conditions of employment and education. 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-01 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
 
The Boston Public Schools will vigorously implement and actively 
enforce this policy to ensure that all its daily operations are 
characterized by fairness, respect, and equity. Any violation of this 
policy will be viewed as serious misconduct and may result in 
discipline, up to and including termination of the offending 
employee or expulsion of the responsible student. Retaliation 
against any person who has testified, assisted, or participated in 
any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing of a 
report of a violation of this policy, will similarly be viewed as 
serious misconduct and may result in discipline, up to and 
including termination or expulsion. 
Information about the investigative procedures associated with 
this policy is detailed in Superintendent’s Circulars EQT-02 and 
EQT-05. 
All Boston Public Schools newly printed publications (e.g., Code 
of Conduct, Citywide Learning Standards and Curriculum 
Frameworks, course selection booklets, student/parent/employee 
handbooks, job postings, etc.) for students, parents, teachers, 
non-academic employees, and the general public must contain 
the following nondiscrimination notice: 
The Boston Public Schools, in accordance with its 
nondiscrimination policies, does not discriminate in its 
programs, facilities, or employment or educational 
opportunities on the basis of race, color, age, criminal 
record (inquiries only), disability, pregnancy, homelessness, 
sex/gender, gender identity, religion, national origin, 
ancestry, sexual orientation, genetics, natural or protective 
hairstyle, or military status, and does not tolerate any form 
of retaliation, or bias-based intimidation, threat, or 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EQT-01 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
 
harassment that demeans individuals’ dignity or interferes 
with their ability to learn or work. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Assistant Superintendent of Equity 
Department: 
Office of Equity 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9650 
Fax: 
617-635-7940 
Email: 
bpsequity@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


