Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
FAM-08 
Version 01 
 
 
 
• TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION SERVICES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
to a subsequent version.  
 
HISTORICAL CONTEXT 
The “Parent Communications” section of the Successor 
Settlement Agreement between the Boston Public Schools (BPS) 
and the Department of Justice (DOJ) outlines the services that 
must be provided to ensure meaningful language access for our 
BPS families. The Office of Language Access, formerly the 
Translation and Interpretation Unit (T&I), was established to 
implement and coordinate interpretation and translation services 
throughout BPS to centralize and standardize language access 
across the district. The Office of Language Access strives to 
provide meaningful language access to limited and non-English 
proficient constituents via qualified, trained, and professional 
interpreters and translators.  
REQUEST PARAMETERS 
The Office of Language Access handles translation and 
interpretation services for essential information. The following list 
provides examples of essential information requiring translation 
and interpretation: 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-08 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
 
 
• IEP/504 meetings 
• Report cards for students 
• Academic progress reports for students 
• Enrollment/registration documents 
• Disciplinary process information 
• Permission slips/forms for district and school activities and 
programs 
• Applications for activities requiring parental consent 
• Parent-teacher conferences 
• Open houses 
• Parent handbooks 
• Public health and safety information 
• Documents on academic planning/options 
• Screening procedures needing students’/parents’ language 
backgrounds, the process for refusing all/some ELL services  
• Written information on parents’/students’ rights and 
responsibilities 
• Written information on services and benefits available to 
parents and students  
With every request, the Office of Language Access will determine 
whether the services sought are the most appropriate to fulfill 
the specific language access need and may tailor the request 
accordingly. Fulfilling requests for translation and interpretation 
of non-essential information is at the discretion of the Office of 
Language Access and is contingent on availability.  
 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-08 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
 
SERVICES PROVIDED BY QUALIFIED AND BILINGUAL STAFF  
The district is charged with providing qualified and trained 
translators and interpreters to ensure families have meaningful 
access to information. As such, the Office of Language Access 
discourages the use of non-approved professionals with 
bi/multilingual skills, save for in exceptional circumstances. In 
addition, the use of computers/machines to translate is strongly 
discouraged.  
REQUESTING TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION SERVICES 
All services are requested and managed through the district's 
online translation and interpretation request platform. Please be 
aware that the Office of Language Access can only support 
Boston Public Schools' requests placed through the Office of 
Language Access online platform to comply with the City of 
Boston's procurement regulations and processes. To that end, 
any language access work performed outside of the district's 
established translation and interpretation protocol will be at the 
requester's expense. 
Schools should designate one primary and one alternate point of 
contact for submitting their translation and interpretation 
requests. In addition, the point of contact (1) is responsible for 
answering logistic questions about events, (2) will serve as the 
contact for interpreters, (3) will provide informational materials 
for interpreters before scheduled events, and (4) will clarify 
written content and receive the written translations. Lastly, this 
person must also promptly fill out the post-service survey. 
For district staff, designated central office employees may 
request translation and interpretation services. Similarly, the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-08 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
 
central office requester serves as the point of contact for that 
service. This could entail (1) answering logistics questions about 
events, (2) contacting on-site/virtual interpreters, (3) providing 
informational materials for interpreters prior to the event, (4) 
clarifying written content/materials, and (5) receiving the written 
translations. This person must also promptly fill out the post-
service survey. 
FULFILLING REQUESTS FOR TRANSLATIONS AND 
INTERPRETATIONS  
For translations, requesters should allow a minimum of 2 weeks, 
bearing in mind that larger jobs will, correspondingly, take longer 
to complete. As rush/short notice jobs do occur, please specify on 
the request form if the translation needs expediting. Expediting 
is at the discretion of the Office of Language Access.  
For in-person interpretations, the more advance notice given, the 
easier it is to secure interpreter services. Please submit a request 
a minimum of 2 weeks before the service date. For American Sign 
Language (ASL), a minimum of 3 weeks is recommended to 
secure services. As rush/short notice jobs do occur, please specify 
on the request form if the service needs to be expedited. 
Interpreter assignment is based on availability and not 
guaranteed.  
Emergent requests outside of the Superintendent’s and 
Communications offices that need to be expedited will be 
completed in a timeframe at the discretion of the Office of 
Language Access. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-08 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
 
CANCELLATIONS OF SERVICES 
The Office of Language Access must be notified immediately of 
any appointment cancellation in which an interpreter (i.e., oral, 
ASL) has been scheduled. A 48-hour notice of cancellation is 
required for ASL. For oral interpreter services, we require a 24-
hour notice of notice of cancellation. Please be aware that if you 
fail to cancel within the designated timeframes, the district will 
be charged for the services you requested. This can lead to 
inefficient utilization of our limited funds and resources, which 
we strive to avoid. To cancel interpreter services, please submit 
via interpretations@bostonpublicschools.org. If you are canceling 
translation requests, please do so as early as possible via 
translations@bostonpublicschools.org. 
TELEPHONIC INTERPRETATION SERVICES 
Schools have the option to utilize the on-demand LionBridge 
Telephonic Interpretation service that is available 24 hours a day, 
7 days a week, 365 days a year, in more than 350 languages. 
Telephonic interpretation is the oral transmission of a message 
from one language to another via telephone. It is typically 
conducted in consecutive mode, meaning the interpreter will 
translate the message after the speaker has stopped speaking. 
This service should be used for instances when parent 
communication is not pre-scheduled, e.g., a parent stops by a 
school, a school must contact the parent of a sick/injured 
student, etc. When essential information is discussed, please 
ensure that an interpreter or translation of relevant documents is 
requested in advance.  
The Office of Language Access will monitor calls and usage to 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-08 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
 
ensure adherence to district protocols. Schools and/or central 
office departments will be notified of usage restrictions due to 
non-adherence, which will be at the discretion of the Office of 
Language Access. 
TALKING POINTS 
Schools have access to TalkingPoints, which is a two-way 
multilingual family engagement platform allowing educators and 
administrators the opportunity to communicate with families in 
their native language (including English speakers) via the web, 
mobile, or text messages. 
• TalkingPoints equips educators and administrators with a 
platform for collaborative communication and analytics 
around family engagement and student progress to 
increase student potential for long-term success.  
• The service is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 
days a year, in more than 100 languages.1  
• It removes the need for educators to provide parents with 
their personal cell phone numbers. 
ASSISTANCE  
For further information, including but not limited to detailed 
 
1 At present, the platform doesn't support Caboverdiano; 
however, a simplified version is currently being piloted at the 
Orchard Gardens Elementary School. The simplified version 
supports outgoing one-way messaging/announcements to 
families only. Additional functionality will be considered based on 
pilot results. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-08 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
 
translation and interpretation policy and procedures, tutorials 
(i.e., How to Submit a Request, Request Platform User Guide, 
School-Based Administrator Training Webinar), and school and 
parent resources/materials to support your school-specific 
language access efforts, please refer to the Office of Language 
Access website at 
https://www.bostonpublicschools.org/translation-interpretation. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Language Access Services 
Department: 
Family and Community Advancement 
(Office of Language Access) 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-7967  
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


