Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FAM-04 
Version 01 
 
 
SCHOOL SITE COUNCIL PERSONNEL SUBCOMMITTEE  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Deepening partnerships with families is one of the key strategies 
for strengthening student learning and closing achievement 
gaps in the Boston Public Schools. Consistent with the principles 
of school-based management, the School Site Council engages 
parents and students in shared decision-making as a lever for 
school improvement.  The intention of the Personnel 
Subcommittee is to actively involve members of the school 
community in the teacher hiring process, as these decisions will 
have a significant impact on instructional practice and the lives of 
students.       
RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PERSONNEL SUBCOMMITTEE 
The responsibilities of the Personnel Subcommittee of the School 
Site Council are to: 
• Approve the hiring of new Boston Teachers Union (BTU) 
teachers’ bargaining unit staff and in-transfer of BTU 
teachers’ bargaining unit staff from other schools in the 
system and the choice of teachers from the excess pool. 
• Approve the selection of lead teachers, new teacher 
developers, mentor teachers, and new athletic coaches. 
• Determine the schedule and procedures for reviewing 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-04 
Page 2 of 5 
 
candidates for positions. 
 
The decisions of the Personnel Subcommittee are not subject to 
the approval of the School Site Council.   
PERSONNEL SUB-COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP 
1. The Personnel Subcommittee shall consist of two teachers, 
one parent, one student in high schools, and the 
principal/head of school or their designee.   
2. BTU members on the School Site Council shall select the BTU 
representatives to serve on the Personnel Subcommittee.  
3. The parent members of the School Site Council shall select 
the parent representative.   
4. The student members of the School Site Council at high 
schools shall select the student representative. 
5. The composition of the Personnel Subcommittee should 
reflect the racial and ethnic diversity of the school 
community to the extent possible.     
6. Teacher, parent, and student representatives on the 
Personnel Subcommittee may designate temporary 
replacement representatives to the subcommittee for 
specific positions. 
SCHOOL STAFFING 
The Personnel Subcommittee interviews and decides on the 
selection of permanent teachers who voluntarily apply for 
transfer into the school and the hiring of new teachers for 
vacancies, consistent with the terms of the current collective 
bargaining agreement between Boston Public Schools (BPS) and 
the BTU. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-04 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
OPEN POSTING 
In accordance with circular HRS-HS-07, schools must adhere to 
the requirements to open post. Therefore, schools must ensure 
that the Personnel Subcommittee of the School Site Council is 
formed and ready to begin the hiring process by March 1.  
Training related to personnel subcommittees is offered by the 
Office of Family and Community Advancement, the BTU, and the 
Office of Human Capital.   
PERMANENT AND PROVISIONAL TEACHERS 
In addition to permanent teachers who apply for transfer, a 
Personnel Subcommittee may consider a provisional teacher 
with a letter of reasonable assurance for a position which appears 
on the transfer list and that the provisional currently holds within 
the school. 
After interviewing candidates for a vacancy at a school that 
results from the transfer process, or if a vacancy at a school 
occurs after the completion of the regular transfer process, a 
school may choose to advertise or re-advertise the position.   
TIME COMMITMENT 
The Personnel Subcommittee is a standing committee of the 
School Site Council for the duration of the school year.  As such, 
the Personnel Subcommittee must be formed by October 31 and 
should meet as vacancies occur. The Personnel Subcommittee is 
not required to meet between the end of one school year and the 
beginning of the succeeding school year.  Before the summer 
recess, members of the Personnel Subcommittee should leave 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-04 
Page 4 of 5 
 
contact information with the principal/head of school, who will 
contact members prior to the interviewing or hiring of any 
teacher applicants. 
ALIGNMENT WITH EDUCATOR EVALUATION 
The Massachusetts School-Level Administrator Rubric includes 
Family and Community Engagement (Standard III) as one of four 
standards for effective principals/head of school practice.  
Engaging parents and students in shared decision-making as 
members of the Personnel Subcommittee aligns with Standard 
III, Indicator A, Family Engagement of the rubric.  Sharing 
evidence of effective implementation of the Personnel 
Subcommittee may be a valuable way for principals/heads of 
school to demonstrate proficient practice in Standard III.     
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION AND SUPPORT 
For additional information on the role and purpose of the School 
Site Council, shared decision-making, and school-based 
management, please refer to circular FAM-01 School Site Council 
and the School Site Council Manual. 
For additional information on school staffing and hiring, please 
refer to circular HRS-HS-07 School Staffing, Reassignment, and 
Hiring. 
Engagement staff from the Office of Family and Community 
Advancement (OFCA) are available to provide support, coaching, 
and technical assistance related to shared decision-making and 
school-based management to all BPS schools.  
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-04 
Page 5 of 5 
 
Additionally, OFCA and the BTU collaborate to provide training 
for schools on all aspects of the School Site Council, including the 
Personnel Subcommittee.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Family School Engagement 
Practice Team 
Department: 
Office of Family and Community 
Advancement 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Boston, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-7750 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


