Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER:  
FAM-03 
Version 01 
 
MIDDLE AND HIGH SCHOOL STUDENT GOVERNMENT 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
“As we continue to work at improving the quality of education 
for all students, it is important that the voice of students be 
heard at the local, state and national levels.”  
Massachusetts Dept. of Elementary and Secondary Education  
  
Every Boston public middle and high school (including district 
schools, exam schools, and all alternative, pilot, and in-district 
charter schools) must have a written student engagement policy 
documenting opportunities for students to assume leadership 
roles within classrooms and the broader school community, in 
alignment with the 2016 BPS Opportunity and Achievement Gaps 
Policy. As part of this policy, each high school must also have a 
functioning and engaged student government. Middle schools 
are encouraged to have a student government. Student leaders 
in this body will represent their peers by serving as advisors, 
researchers, and participants in the decision-making process at 
the school and district level. Student government serves to 
engage students in learning about democracy and leadership.  
Student government bodies are essential to ensuring equity in all 
aspects of schooling. With faculty and administrative support, 
student government members should:  
● Ensure student voices are heard and incorporated in school 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-03 
Page 2 of 7 
 
decision making through the School Site Council, 
(SSC)/Governing Board, and meetings with the 
administration.  
● Develop and grow a body of student leaders by working 
closely with the faculty advisor(s) and the head of school. 
● Organize the student body and advocate for policies, 
practices, and opportunities that will close opportunity gaps 
at the school and district level. 
Through student government and SSC, students can assist in 
fulfilling the school’s mission and design and improve the culture 
and climate of the school.  
STUDENT GOVERNMENT COMPOSITION 
Schools will strive to form a student government that reflects the 
diversity of the student population in terms of race/ethnicity, 
gender, grade level, educational program (e.g., general, special, 
and bilingual education), and other factors. The number of 
participants should depend on the size of the school and what is 
manageable for the advisor. The recommendation is to have 10-15 
students serve in student government.  
It is recommended that student government members be 
connected to other school-based groups such as the School-
Based Wellness Council and student clubs. These positions can 
be dual roles with other positions on Student Government or can 
be stand alone. The faculty advisor should help students think 
about their time and commitments and what it would mean to 
take on dual roles in the student government.  
ROLE OF THE FACULTY ADVISOR 
The principal/head of school, with student input, should appoint 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-03 
Page 3 of 7 
 
one or more faculty advisors to support and oversee each student 
government. The principal/head of school will include students in 
the selection process. Student governments can be considered 
school clubs, and as such principals/heads of school are strongly 
encouraged to pay a stipend to the faculty advisor(s). 
The faculty advisor(s) will:  
● Facilitate youth leadership in all aspects of student 
governance. 
● Meet with the student government at least twice per month 
and provide support in organizing quarterly meetings each 
school year. 
● Assist student government leaders in the development of 
action plans for the school and obtain the appropriate 
approvals before a plan is implemented.  
● Assist student government leaders in planning and 
managing their events/activities, supporting with logistics 
and approval.  
● Act as a liaison between the student government, School Site 
Council/Governing Board, and the Instructional Leadership 
Team (ILT). 
● Ensure the tracking of data and support members as they 
complete reporting on activities.  
● Provide the principal/head of school with regular updates on 
how the action plans are being carried out.  
● Advise student government leaders on their leadership and 
scholar-activism. 
● Monitor and record all student work and approvals for 
proposals and dates.  
● Develop student leaders by providing or facilitating training 
and support as necessary. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-03 
Page 4 of 7 
 
ALIGNMENT WITH PRINCIPAL/HEAD OF SCHOOL EVALUATION 
Please refer to the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and 
Secondary Education Educator Evaluation: Appendix B: School-
Level Administrator Rubric. 
● Indicator III-A1. Family Engagement. 
o Engages SG in activities, events, and opportunities to 
create a welcoming environment. 
o Students contribute to the design by sharing their 
knowledge of family and culture. 
o Students evaluate and problem solve with staff and 
leadership challenges/barriers to including families in the 
school community. 
● Indicator IV-B1. Policies and Practices. 
o Students participate in an activity identifying the makeup 
of the school. 
o Cultural Sharing day. 
o Students participate in SSC and/or other groups that 
develop culturally sensitive policies. 
● Indicator IV-E-1. Shared Vision Development. 
o Students are part of the visioning process through focus 
groups, surveys, community meetings, etc. 
o Students share in the developing messaging for the 
student body. 
● Indicator IV-F-3. Consensus Building.  
o Conflict resolution. 
o Restorative justice practices. 
o Student involvement in SSC and decision-making body. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-03 
Page 5 of 7 
 
ELECTIONS 
It is the responsibility of every principal/head of school to ensure 
that elections are held and the student government is 
established no later than October 15. The recommendation is that 
all student elections be held as one process by April 15 of the 
current school year to roll out the following school year. See the 
Student Elections Toolkit for guidance on facilitating student 
elections and all the necessary reporting forms. 
REPORTING 
Once the student government is established, each school must 
send the student government roster to the Office of Youth 
Leadership, which must include: 
1. Student information for all elected positions.  
2. Student information for the two (2) students who are 
elected to serve on SSC or Governing Board (these 
students shall also serve on the Personnel 
Subcommittee). 
3. Student information for the BSAC representative (see 
Superintendent Circular FAM-06). 
4. Student information for the Greater Boston Regional 
Student Advisory Council (GBRSAC) representatives. 
Please note the Department of Elementary and 
Secondary Education requires secondary schools to host 
their student elections for GBRSAC representatives and 
those names be submitted no later than mid-April for the 
representatives serving the following school year.  
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-03 
Page 6 of 7 
 
MIDDLE SCHOOL LEVEL OVERVIEW 
Middle school student governments serve the same functions as 
high school student governments. During middle school, 
students are building their self-advocacy skills to develop their 
voices, identities, and agency in the school community. Learning 
about leadership is a key activity for many middle school student 
governments. Student government members learn how to 
research, plan, organize, and execute programs and activities for 
many students. The student government advisor leads student 
government members in developing their leadership skills.  
Practicing Democracy: Governing democratically is a skill 
students learn during student government. Student government 
gives students hands-on experience in the workings of a 
democracy and teaches them how to work cooperatively with 
others. Meetings should be run to promote students' working 
together for the common good and learning how to put 
leadership into action. 
Planning and Implementing School Spirit Activities: Building 
school spirit and culture that is linguistically sustaining and 
affirming can be one of the projects of the student government. 
Through school events such as talent shows, fundraisers, and 
assemblies, students, teachers, faculty members and parents 
come together to help plan these activities throughout the 
school year and appoint various people to run these functions.  
Addressing Cares, Concerns, and Restorative Justice: Students 
will raise school concerns that can best be addressed in student 
government. Whether it is more nutritious foods served in the 
cafeteria or issues regarding school spirit days, student 
government meetings give students a forum for sharing their 
grievances and analyzing possible solutions to these problems. 
With the support of the Office of Restorative Justice, students 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-03 
Page 7 of 7 
 
can be trained as circle keepers and can implement restorative 
justice to build community, repair harm, and promote collective 
healing. 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
October 15 
Deadline for student government elections to be 
held  
October 15 
Deadline for reporting the student government 
roster, including all student and faculty 
information listed above, to the Office of Youth 
Leadership at BSAC@bostonpublicschools.org 
October 31 
Deadline for the first student government meeting 
to be held 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Director of Opportunity Youth 
Department: 
Department of Opportunity Youth 
Mailing Address: 443 Warren Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-9620 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


