Page 1:
 
 
  
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER:  
FAM-06 
 
 
BOSTON STUDENT ADVISORY COUNCIL 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Massachusetts State Law Chapter 71: Section 38M. Student 
Advisory Committee states: School committees of cities, towns 
and regional school districts shall meet at least once every other 
month, during the months school is in session, with a student 
advisory committee to consist of five members to be composed 
of students elected by the student body of the high school or 
high schools in each city, town, or regional school district.  
MISSION STATEMENT 
The Boston Student Advisory Council advocates for and protects 
the voices of students in the Boston Public School system, 
empowers the student body to express their opinions regarding 
educational policy changes, and ensures that students are 
included in decision and policy making which impacts their lives 
and educational experiences. 
In the Boston Public Schools, students can apply to their school 
to serve on the Boston Student Advisory Council. The Boston 
Student Advisory Council (BSAC), a citywide body of student 
leaders representing their respective high schools, serves as the 
voice of students to the Boston School Committee, the 
superintendent, and central office departments. BSAC offers 
student perspectives on policies, initiatives, and reform efforts, 
and inform their respective schools about relevant citywide 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-06 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
school issues. They also address student issues by developing 
district-wide policies and working with student governments and 
heads of schools on school level policies and practices. 
BSAC is made up of a Full Council and Executive Committee. The 
Full Council is the think tank which generates the ideas for 
projects, and the Executive Committee is the leadership team of 
six (6) to twelve (12) students who serve as the advising body to 
the Boston School Committee and superintendent. The Executive 
Committee also plans and facilitates meetings with the support 
of the BSAC manager, facilitates youth engagement in district 
initiatives and departments, develops BSAC priorities, and 
monitors progress. 
Each Boston public high school (including district, exam, all high 
school-level alternative, pilot, and in-district charter schools) is 
required to have at least one and up to two BSAC representatives 
from their school. The BSAC representative is a part of the 
student government and must regularly attend student 
government meetings to share BSAC’s work, receive feedback, 
and gather input on projects/policies. Where possible, it is helpful 
to have a student representative who is on the School Site 
Council serve on BSAC as well. There are two ways students may 
become a BSAC member: (1) through student elections at the 
school level, or (2) through the BSAC application managed by the 
Office of Youth Leadership.  
ROLE OF BSAC MEMBERS 
1. To elect a leadership team that will serve in advisory to the 
School Committee as part of its decision-making process. 
2. To keep their Student Government and school community 
informed about relevant district initiatives and decisions, 
and actively seek and collect feedback to inform district 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-06 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
decision making through regular attendance and 
participation in Student Government meetings. 
3. To work on BSAC projects and initiatives.  
BSAC representatives will:  
• Represent their schools at BSAC meetings.  
• Assist in decision making for their schools by advising the 
administration on student-centered citywide issues and 
policies.  
• Work on policies that BSAC develops.  
• Perform tasks necessary to advance project work, such as 
surveys, meetings with heads of schools and Student 
Government advisors, peer interviews, etc. 
• Ensure representation of student voice for their school 
through continuous engagement with the Student 
Government and their broader student body. 
The Office of Youth Leadership is responsible for oversight and 
support of BSAC.  
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FAM-06 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
September 29 First BSAC meeting for returning representatives 
October 15 
Deadline to hold Student Government Elections 
October 15 
 
Email names of Student Government 
representative(s) and BSAC member to Office of 
Youth Leadership, 
BSAC@bostonpublicschools.org  
October 28 
Deadline for youth to apply to City of Boston’s 
Success Link to qualify for a youth job slot. When 
possible, the Office of Youth Leadership partners 
with the City of Boston’s Department of Youth 
Engagement and Employment to provide paid 
youth jobs to BSAC members. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner 
Senior Director of Opportunity Youth 
Department: 
Department of Opportunity Youth 
Mailing Address: 443 Warren Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-9620 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


