Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FIN-09 
Version 01 
 
 
PRIVATE CONTRIBUTIONS MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS PRIVATE CONTRIBUTIONS 
All external funding — to the district as a whole, individual 
schools, central offices, or fiscal sponsorship — that is received 
from private sources, such as foundation grants, contributions, 
and individual donations other than public state and federal 
grants, must adhere to the established rules and guidelines set 
forth in this circular. 
Schools may not receive cash grants directly into activity 
accounts or any other accounts maintained by the school (see 
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04, Student Activity Accounts). 
Schools and departments may solicit in-kind services and 
contributions from private sources (businesses, non-profit 
foundations, and individuals) to be made to the Boston Public 
Schools via the Boston Educational Development Foundation, 
Inc. (BEDF) in accordance with the guidelines set forth in State 
Ethics Commission opinion EC-COI-12-1. Programs funded by 
private philanthropy must further BPS goals. Funds will not be 
accepted from sources specifically precluded by the School 
Committee (there are no fund sources specifically precluded at 
this time). 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-09 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
 
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
All private funds must comply with funders’ intentions and 
guidelines established by BEDF regarding programming, 
spending, accounting, and auditing, as well as related to civil 
rights, access, and confidentiality as per the public use of these 
funds. 
The program supervisor is the individual who will be responsible 
for overseeing the program(s) or initiative that private 
contributions are funding. 
The fund manager is the department head or the respective 
principal/head of school and/or a designee and will be the 
primary point of contact for all management issues for BEDF. The 
fund manager will take fiscal responsibility for managing private 
contributions and assure the submission of proper reporting to 
funders. 
BEDF has fiduciary and financial oversight responsibility for 
private-funded programs, including compliance with all relevant 
regulations and reporting. BEDF must sign contracts and other 
legal documents that could raise a liability and oversee the full 
execution of grant agreements and/or award letters. BEDF will 
follow guidelines set by its Board of Directors and funders’ 
restrictions and will collaborate to comply with other 
requirements related to civil rights, access, and confidentiality. 
ABOUT BEDF  


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-09 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
Mission 
The Boston Educational Development Foundation, Inc. (BEDF) 
was founded in 1984 by the superintendent and School 
Committee for departments and schools to improve their ability 
to raise money from private sources including foundations, 
corporations, and individuals.  
BEDF is a 501(c)(3) that exists to improve educational 
opportunities for the students of BPS. BEDF provides fiscal 
sponsorship and fundraising support for programs and 
opportunities that may otherwise not be possible, such as: out of 
school time; enrichment and health initiatives for students; 
leadership and professional development for teachers; 
engagement and learning programs for families; and multiple 
academic initiatives.  
Fiscal Sponsorship Services 
BEDF provides general, financial, and administrative 
management and staffing to private-funded programs that 
further the educational aims and goals of BPS. BEDF also 
provides fundraising support in the following areas: grant 
seeking and administration; assistance in grants review and 
submission; and the creation of online fundraising campaigns for 
schools and programs. 
Indirect Rate 
BEDF charges an 8% indirect rate on all grants, donations, 
sponsorships, and other charitable contributions for which BEDF 
serves as the fiscal sponsor. This indirect rate does not apply to 
any BPS student scholarships. The BEDF Board of Directors has 
the authority to change the rate at any time by giving written 
notice to Fund Managers.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-09 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
 
PRE-AWARD 
All BPS staff, parents, and partners are encouraged to seek and 
apply for private funding opportunities from a variety of sources. 
School fundraising is a team process within the 
department/school to enable those individuals who will 
ultimately be responsible for implementing the programs to be 
involved. Heads of schools, principals, and other administrative 
heads must be aware of and approve private solicitations for 
programs that will take place under their supervision.  
Intent to Apply 
All BPS entities planning to pursue a private funding opportunity 
must submit an online Intent to Apply Form (for asks above 
$10,000) 1-3 months prior to the deadline for submission, if 
possible. This will ensure that potential funding applications are 
consistent with BPS goals and are not in conflict with other BPS 
solicitations to the same agencies and funders. 
The Intent to Apply Form will be revised on a weekly basis by the 
cross-functional BPS Grants Review Team and will communicate 
a recommendation to the applicant. Upon confirmation, you will 
receive a completed grant cover page to be signed by your 
department head/supervisor. For grant applications seeking 
letters of support, a brief form will be attached as well. 
POST AWARD 
BEDF holds private funds through a set of strictly segregated 
funds (previously called accounts). Either fund managers or 
funders must forward the award letter and/or grant agreement 
(that includes program and budget information) along with the 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-09 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
deposit form to BEDF. If a new account is needed, the fund 
manager should submit the proper form. BEDF will notify within 
five business days upon receipt.  
SPENDING, MONITORING, AND REPORTING 
Spending 
Funds held at BEDF will adhere to BEDF current spending, 
financial, and administrative policies regarding accounts 
receivable and payable, employee stipend documentation, and 
any other administrative controls established. For privately 
funded programs, BEDF only compensates individuals as 
independent contractors (1099) or through the BPS approved 
commitment letter process (if individuals are BPS employees). 
Individuals are subject to applicable state and federal taxes. 
Programs will keep their own records to comply with applicable 
BPS regulations. Please contact BEDF at admin@bedf.org for 
detailed information.  
The BEDF executive director must co-sign all contracts and other 
documents in which BEDF could incur liability, legal exposure, or 
financial obligations, including purchase orders and grant 
agreements, on behalf of the programs. 
For internal controls, all expenses require signoff by the fund 
managers or designee before any costs can be incurred or 
payments released. 
The fund manager is responsible for monitoring the spending of 
the private funds. This includes assuring that the funds are being 
used for allowable expenses; spending according to the 
contribution timeline; entering receipt for goods/services; and 
submitting invoices to BEDF for all matters related to their 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-09 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
program budget. In case private-funded program budgets need 
to be amended, they should get approval from the funder. BEDF 
will ensure these responsibilities are fully completed in 
accordance with the provisions of the funder and these 
guidelines. 
Monitoring 
Fund managers are responsible for preparing and submitting 
interim reports as requested by funders. BEDF will support 
completions and take the appropriate steps to ensure timely 
report submission. 
Programmatic grant reports are the responsibility of the fund 
manager who is overseeing the program being funded. Fund 
managers must send a copy of completed reports to BEDF. 
Final Reports 
BEDF will produce a financial report to be finalized and 
complemented with program outcomes by the fund manager in 
order to complete and submit a final report as per the funder 
guidelines. Please submit a copy of the final version to BEDF for 
record keeping purposes. BEDF will take proper measures to 
assure fiduciary responsibility to funders, including freezing the 
activity of the fund until submission is complete. 
AUDITING 
The fund manager and program supervisor will collaborate with 
auditors, consultants, and program advisors as requested by 
BEDF to ensure compliance with tax regulations and impact 
assessment of the partnership with BPS, including site visits and 
data collection efforts.  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-09 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
For general inquiries, please email admin@bedf.org.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner 
Email 
Executive Director, BEDF 
 admin@bedf.org 
Director of Finance and 
Operations, BEDF 
 admin@bedf.org 
Assistant Director of 
Finance, BEDF 
 admin@bedf.org 
Resource Development & 
Communications Manager, 
BEDF 
 admin@bedf.org 
Finance Associate, BEDF 
 admin@bedf.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


