Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER:  
FIN-03 
Version 01 
 
EXPENDITURE REIMBURSEMENT 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version.  
 
The purpose of this memorandum is to clarify those 
circumstances under which reimbursement is appropriate and 
those that are not. 
The reimbursement process is intended to accommodate those 
limited instances where the traditional purchasing system 
cannot be utilized. It is not intended to replace, substitute for, 
supplant, or otherwise institute an alternative purchasing system. 
 
Expenditures Allowable for Reimbursement 
The reimbursement process is intended to allow for the 
immediate purchase of incidental or emergency goods and 
services that could not be contemplated in the normal course of 
business.  This process can be used when the aggregate 
purchase value of goods or services is minimal.  Make sure the 
proper accounting codes are used and align with the expense. 
Examples of these goods or services include reimbursement for 
an emergency, unanticipated supply, or repair needs minimal in 
cost. 
The reimbursement process is intended to allow individuals to be 
reimbursed for personal expenditures incurred in support of 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-03 
Page 2 of 7 
 
authorized Boston Public Schools activities.  This also applies to 
travel expenses as defined and consistent with the Boston Public 
Schools travel policy (refer to Superintendent’s Circular FIN-01 
Travel Policy - Procedures for Approval and Reimbursement). 
 
Expenditures Not Eligible for Reimbursement 
Expenditures not eligible for reimbursement include those for 
the purchase of goods and services that are not consistent with 
the guidelines referenced above.  A detailed description of 
guidelines to be used for purchasing can be found in 
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 – Purchasing Guidelines. 
Certain expenditures, such as purchasing gifts for fellow 
employees, constitute an inappropriate expenditure of resources 
and are not eligible for reimbursement. 
 
Purchase Of Food 
Food for staff events cannot be reimbursed from fund 100.  Fund 
100 can only be used for students, parents and community 
events using the food account code 53204, be sure funds are 
available prior to submitting for reimbursement.  If you are using 
fund 200, the rules of the grant must allow for food purchases, 
prior to purchase always check with your grant liaison. 
The practice of purchasing food products from supermarkets for 
parents, school councils, or other meetings is an acceptable (and 
more cost-effective) mechanism than procuring catered services.  
These expenditures will be reimbursed, but only upon the 
presentation of itemized invoices and cash register receipts. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-03 
Page 3 of 7 
 
Reimbursements will be made only for those items that can be 
appropriately documented. 
 
Gift Cards/Certificates: A Specific Issue 
The purchase of gift cards/certificates is not permitted.  The use 
of gift cards/certificates does not allow for appropriate controls 
that document the nature and value of the items that are 
ultimately purchased.  Nor does this practice allow for the proper 
reporting of expenditures.  It is a practice that is highly 
susceptible to abuse. 
 
Documentation Required for Reimbursement: 
In order to secure prompt reimbursement, all requests must be 
submitted to the Business Office within fifteen (15) business days 
of purchase.  Allowable expenditures for reimbursement must be 
fully supported by appropriate documentation/receipts.  Follow 
the procedures below (Emails Accepted): 
1. 
Submit a completed “City of Boston Special Draft/Non 
Order Form” - it MUST be filled out completely with: 
● School/Department 
● Date 
● Full name of person being reimbursed 
● Full address of person being reimbursed 
● Vendor # 
● Funding source 
● Full “detailed” description     


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-03 
Page 4 of 7 
 
● Total amount requested 
● Must be signed by the employee’s immediate 
supervisor 
2. 
Submit the “Certification Form” attesting “under 
penalty of perjury, that amounts stated are correct and 
were incurred in the service of the City of Boston 
3. 
Itemized (not summary) of cash register receipts  
4. 
Itemized invoice produced by the vendor 
5. 
Copies of the front and back of cancelled personal 
checks, or Credit card statement that details the item(s) 
purchased by an individual.  The name of the person being 
reimbursed should be on the check and credit card 
statement – for Proof of Purchase  
 
BPS does NOT reimburse taxes for expenditures unless the 
Student Activity Account is being used for the purchase - BPS 
will reimburse taxes and tips on FOOD ONLY. 
 
REMINDER:  You must be registered on the City of Boston 
Vendor/Supplier Portal file in order to be reimbursed.  Go to 
www.boston.gov/procurement   click on "Go to Supplier Portal" 
and follow the instructions.  Wait until you are an approved 
vendor and have acquired your vendor number before 
submitting for reimbursement. 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-03 
Page 5 of 7 
 
If Submitting by Paper: 
• ONLY Submit Single-Sided reimbursements packet – Not 
Double Sided.  Also, no smaller than 12 Font and only on 8x11 
white paper. 
• DO NOT highlight or put scotch tape on receipts because it 
fades the receipts – use staples, only legible receipts will be 
reimbursed – Must submit copies on 8x11 paper of all cash 
register receipts. 
 
 
IMPORTANT REMINDER 
The Fiscal School Year ends on June 30 each year and July 1 
starts the new Fiscal School Year - You cannot use current school 
year funds to pay for prior school year expenses. 
 
Reimbursements that are not submitted within the School Fiscal 
Year will be in jeopardy of non-payment. 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-03 
Page 6 of 7 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Unit Leader of Business Services/Accounts 
Payable 
Department: 
Business Services 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA  02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9469 
E-mail: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
Business Services Guide is available here.


Page 7:
 
 


