Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FIN-16 
Version 01 
 
 
 
BUDGET TRANSFERS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Please use the online reference document Budget Transfers as 
your guide to initiating online budget transfer requests.   
 
INTRODUCTION 
Each year, departments review their budgets and allocate money 
for various goods and services for the next fiscal year. Funds are 
allocated to budget lines reflective of their intended use. As 
needs change, departments often want to reallocate money 
between budget lines. This can be accomplished through a 
budget transfer. Budget transfers are the mechanism by which 
available budgeted resources are moved from one budget line 
item to another in the Boston Public Schools financial system 
(PeopleSoft). 
All budget transfer requests are entered directly into the 
PeopleSoft financial system by authorized users (principals, 
heads of school, responsibility center managers, or their 
designees). The Budget Office no longer accepts paper transfer 
forms. A detailed “job aid” follows on how an online budget 
transfer request is initiated.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-16 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
 
The on-line budget transfer request process involves 6 basic 
components:  
1) Navigate to the transfer “form” (budget journal) in 
PeopleSoft. 
2) Enter data (explanation, budget codes, dollars, and/or FTEs).  
3) Complete a budget error check.  
4) Save the completed transfer.  
5) Send to the Budget Office for approval.  
6) Track the progress of your transfer online. 
INCREMENTAL APPROACH 
Budget transfers employ an “incremental” approach, meaning 
that if dollars are being moved from a particular line item, a 
negative dollar value will be associated with that line item. 
Conversely, if resources are being moved to a line item, the dollar 
value in the amount column will be a positive figure. Budget 
transfers must sum to $0. For example, if a principal wished to 
move $3,000.00 from a contracts line item to a stipends line item, 
the transfer lines might look like this: 
Account 
Fund 
RC 
Program 
Subclass 
Amount 
52907 
Contracted 
Services  
100 
General 
Fund     
101203 
Adams 
School  
2112  
Elem Ed.       
 
 
0000 
- 
$3,000.00 
51202 Prof. 
OT/ Stipends 
100 
General 
Fund     
101203 
Adams 
School 
2014  
Grade 4      
 
 
0000   
$3,000.00     
 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-16 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
 
Budget transfers involving additions, deletions, or changes to full-
time equivalent (FTE) positions also follow an incremental 
approach. Therefore, a negative FTE would be associated with the 
reduction or deletion of a position, and a positive FTE with the 
creation or increase of a position. For example, if I wished to 
reduce a position from a 0.8 FTE to a 0.6 FTE, I would type -0.2 in 
the FTE column (“statistic amount” in the budget journal) for that 
budget line. If I wished to delete that position entirely, I would 
have put -0.8 in the FTE column. If I had wished to increase the 
position to 1.0 FTE, I would have typed 0.2 in the FTE column. 
Whenever a budget transfer involves a position, the position 
number should be identified in the “reference” field in the 
budget transfer. If requesting a new position, leave the reference 
field blank, to be filled in by the Budget Office when the new 
position is created.   
REQUIREMENTS & RESTRICTIONS 
1. The authorizer requesting the transfer must have BAIS FN 
access.  
2. No Responsibility Center will be allowed to transfer funds 
arising from staff vacancies.  These “lag funds” make up the 
Boston Public Schools contingency fund and will be 
reallocated at the sole discretion of the superintendent.  
Exceptions to this policy will only be made upon written 
request and written approval by the chief financial officer. 
3. Funds should not be transferred out of personnel accounts 
(starting with 51__) or substitute accounts. Under normal 
circumstances, adjustments to budget line items associated 
with positions will be rare and must be explicitly approved 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-16 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
 
by the Office of Human Capital prior to the budget transfer 
request being approved. 
4. Budget transfer requests that lack sufficient explanatory 
detail in the “Long Description” text box on the budget 
journal header will not be approved. 
5. In concert with the annual requisition deadline, budget 
transfers for any fiscal year will not be processed after the 
April requisition deadline of that fiscal year.  The only 
exception to this policy may be transfers for grants which 
extend beyond June 30.  
6. Transfer requests which exceed the “available amount” left 
in a particular line will not be processed (in other words, you 
cannot transfer funds which you have already spent!). 
7. Line-item budget transfers can only take place within a 
funding source (i.e., General Fund to General Fund or Title 1 
to Title 1), but not between the General Fund and a grant, 
nor between two separate grants. 
8. Title I EL funds (programs that begin with 24__) cannot be 
transferred to another program, as this funding can only be 
used for ELLs. Likewise, partnership funds (program 2536), 
and parent support services funds (Fund 200 program 2515) 
should not be moved to another program. Homeless 
services funds (program 2533) should be kept in the same 
code where possible but are not fully restricted. 
9. Authority to request budget transfers is reserved to 
principals, heads of school, and RC managers, unless and 
until they explicitly delegate that authority to a designee in 
writing to the chief financial officer or the budget director. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-16 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
 
10. While the on-line budget transfer protocol has made the 
execution of budget transfers simple and efficient, there is 
no substitute for thoughtful, forward-looking resource 
planning.  The Budget Office is glad to assist with such 
planning. 
 
PLEASE USE THE ONLINE REFERENCE DOCUMENT BUDGET 
TRANSFERS AS YOUR GUIDE TO INITIATING ONLINE BUDGET 
TRANSFER REQUESTS.   
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Budget Director 
Department: 
Budget Office 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street. Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-6772 
E-mail: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
  
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


