Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
FIN-07 
Version 01 
 
 
 
PURCHASING GUIDELINES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Procurement procedures at BPS follow state and federal laws 
and City policies. Non-compliance with these laws could result in 
invalid procurements and unenforceable contracts. The State 
Procurement Law (M.G.L. c. 30B) mandates standard procedures 
for local jurisdictions to ensure fairness and consistency when 
purchasing supplies or services. The information below provides 
the necessary procedures and requirements for purchasing 
supplies or services following competitive and non-competitive 
procurement regulations. 
INDIVIDUALS AUTHORIZED TO SIGN CONTRACTS ON BEHALF 
OF THE BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS  
No Boston Public School employee, other than those listed 
below, may enter into a contract with any vendor.  This includes 
but is not limited to contracts, agreements, memorandums of 
understanding, grants, partnership agreements, or any other 
expenditure that binds the district to pay for services/goods.  This 
includes purchases of services or goods for under $10,000.   
Only three (3) BPS employees are authorized to enter into 
contracts on behalf of the Boston Public Schools:   


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
• The superintendent of schools  
• The BPS chief financial officer 
• The BPS deputy chief financial officer 
 
1. PURCHASES LESS THAN $10,000. 
The standard for selection: Following M.G.L. c. 30B, § 2 "Sound 
Business Practices,”  the school or department must solicit three 
quotes via telephone, email, catalog, or the City Certified 
Business Directory.  A record of these quotes should be recorded 
on this form and kept on file at the school or department for 
auditing purposes. 
Required document: Requisition 
Authorization: Purchase order 
Turnaround time*: 1 -2 Weeks 
 
2. PURCHASES BETWEEN $10,000 - $100,000 
The standard for selection: When procuring supplies or services 
that are not a sole source or exempt from Chapter 30B, schools 
and departments must solicit written quotes from at least three 
vendors via telephone, email, catalog, or the City Certified 
Business Directory.  A record of these quotes should be recorded 
on this form and kept on file at the school or department for 
auditing purposes. The contract should then be awarded to the 
responsible and responsive supplier offering the needed quality 
of supply or service at the lowest price quotation. In cases when 
obtaining three quotes is impossible despite reasonable effort, 
awarding the contract based on one or two quotes is acceptable. 
Important Note: School districts may still opt to issue an IFB 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
when procuring supplies or services estimated to cost $100,000 
or less. 
Required documents: To ensure a timely and efficient 
procurement process, all required documents should be 
submitted to the Business Office/Procurement office at least four 
weeks before the desired procurement date: requisition, Contract 
Request Form, detailed specifications, and, if applicable, a sole-
source letter addressed to the Business Manager. Before 
submitting, use the detailed checklist to verify that all required 
information has been completed. 
Authorization: Purchase order and written quote contract (WQC), 
signed by the vendor and approved by the superintendent and 
the City auditor. 
Turnaround time*: 2 - 4 Weeks 
3. PURCHASES OF MORE THAN $100,000 
The standard for selection: For supplies or services estimated to 
cost more than $100,000, an invitation for bids (IFB) or a request 
for proposals (RFP) can be used. In a bid process, IFB, you award 
the contract to the qualified bidder who meets your 
specifications and offers you the best price. Information for Bid 
(IFB) Sealed bids (M.G.L. c. 30B, § 5. In a proposal process, RPF, you 
award the contract to the offeror submitting the most 
advantageous proposal, considering your specified evaluation 
criteria and price. Request for Proposals (RFP) Sealed proposals 
(M.G.L. c. 30B, § 6 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
Notice/Advertising Requirements: The Business Services and 
Finance Procurement Unit will submit an ad for schools and 
central departments to be posted at least two weeks before bids 
or proposals are due in the City Records. If the procurement 
exceeds $100,000, an advertisement will be published in the 
Goods and Services Bulletin at least two weeks before bids or 
proposals are due. 
Required documents: Requisition and a completed Contract 
Request Form with a detailed written description of the items or 
services to be purchased. 
Authorization: Purchase order and fully executed contract                               
Turnaround time*: 4 - 8 Weeks 
*NOTE: These timelines may not apply to all procurement 
requests. The turnaround times listed above are approximate and 
do not apply to peak procurement periods, ranging from 08/15 to 
09/30 and 04/15 to 06/30. 
4. MOAS AND MOUS AGREEMENTS 
The following types of agreements are exempt from Chapter 30B 
and do not require a City of Boston standard contract to be 
executed: an agreement between agencies, boards, 
commissions, authorities, departments, or public 
instrumentalities of one city or town (ch. 30B§1(7)); or an 
agreement to purchase supplies or services from or to dispose of 
supplies to an agency or instrumentality of the federal 
government, the Commonwealth, or any of its political 
subdivisions or any other state or political subdivision thereof (ch. 
30B§1(9)) 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
• Memoranda of Agreement (MOA), in addition to outlining 
the terms and obligations of each government agency, 
requires payment or exchange or transfer of funds between 
the parties. There are only to be used between two or more 
government agencies. If one or more of the parties to the 
agreement is not a government agency, then the normal 
rules related to standard contracts apply. There is no dollar 
threshold for an MOA.  
All MOAs must be initially reviewed by the BPS Law 
Department, signed by the City Corporation Counsel and 
City Auditing, and necessary signer(s) involved in the 
agreement before it can be accepted as a valid contractual 
agreement.  
• Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) is an agreement of 
terms and obligations that does not include funds transfer 
between the parties. While parties to an MOA must all be 
government agencies, parties to an MOU may, but are not 
required to be, government agencies.  
All MOUs must be initially reviewed by the BPS Law 
Department, signed by the City Corporation Counsel, and 
necessary signer(s) involved in the agreement before it can 
be accepted as a valid contractual agreement.  
NOTE: The Law Department reserves the right to require City 
departments to execute a formal contract in any situation 
involving agreements with non-government entities. 
Authorization: Purchase order and fully executed and signed 
MOA agreement                               
 
Turnaround time*: 4 - 8 Weeks 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
5. GRANT CONTRACTS 
Under Massachusetts General Law, a “grant agreement” is 
defined as “an agreement between a governmental body and an 
individual or nonprofit entity, the purpose of which is to carry out 
a public purpose of support or stimulation instead of procuring 
supplies or services for the benefit or use of the governmental 
body.” If a grant agreement properly fits within this definition, 
then it is exempt from the requirements of Chapter 30B.  
The first step in the analysis of whether a grant agreement can 
be used is to determine the public purpose of the grant and how 
grant funds are being directly linked back to the public delivery 
of a program. Generally, supporting a non-profit organization, or 
keeping it operational, is not a permissible public purpose. While 
non-profits may operate for the public good, grant funds must be 
directly linked back to the specific delivery of a program. Please 
review this Law Department memo for further considerations 
and guidance when determining whether a grant process is 
applicable. If you plan to conduct a grant process because each 
case is evaluated individually, please contact the BPS Office of 
the Legal Advisor at 617-635-9320. 
6. EMERGENCY PURCHASES 
In the case of an unforeseen emergency, if complying with all of 
Chapter 30B's requirements would put people or property at risk, 
you are allowed to procure the necessary item or service without 
full compliance. However, it is important to keep a record of the 
emergency procurement, including the reason for deeming it an 
emergency, the supplier's name, the contract amount and type, 
and a list of the supplies or services purchased under each 
contract. Additionally, document any procedures used to elicit 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
competition. It is important to inform the Business Services 
Procurement Unit of the emergency purchases as soon as 
possible. Please refer to the Goods and Services Bulletin for 
further guidance on processing and emergency procurement.  
7. FOOD PURCHASES 
Food purchases are allowed for events where parents, suppliers, 
constituents, and community members attend — not just 
students, teachers, or the superintendent. If it's a fund 100, it 
must be purchased against the following food budget, 53204.  If 
using fund 200, please check with Yvonne Macrae, Director of 
Grants and External Funds, ymacrae@bostonpublicschools.org, 
to ensure that the grant rules allow food purchases.  Please 
review Superintendent's Circular FIN-03 and additional 
guidelines on reimbursements for food purchases. 
8. REAL PROPERTY – ACQUISITIONS AND DISPOSITIONS –
M.G.L. C. 30B 
Real Property Acquisitions and Dispositions: After determining 
the value of the acquisitions and disposing of the real property 
valued over $35,000.00, an invitation for bids (IFB) or a request for 
proposals (RFP) can be used. In a bid process, an IFB can select 
the proposer who meets your quality requirements and offers the 
lowest price. Information for Bid (IFB) Sealed bids (M.G.L. c. 30B, § 
5. In a proposal process, an RPF will allow you to compare the 
relative merits of the proposals you receive and the price. 
Request for Proposals (RFP) Sealed proposals (M.G.L. c. 30B, § 6 . 
Contact Business Services for further information on when to use 
a license or a lease.  
Notice/Advertising Requirements: The Business Services and 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
Finance Procurement Unit will submit an ad to be published in 
the Central Register at least 30 days before executing a binding 
agreement to acquire the property. M.G.L. c. 30B, § 16(d)  
Authorization: Purchase order and fully executed contract                               
Turnaround time*: 4 - 8 Weeks 
 
RESOURCES 
BPS Legal Advisor 
Legal Advisor  legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
617-635-1577 
Computer Equipment 
OIIT: Director of Technology Business Operations Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
617-635-9190 
Educational and Administrative Applications 
OIIT: Director of Technology Business Operations, Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
617-635-9190 
Purchasing, Textbook Adoptions 
Business Services: Assistant Business Manager 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 617-635-8207 
PeopleSoft/Financials Training 
Business Services: Assistant Business Manager) 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 617-635-8207 
Furniture and Rugs 
Facilities Mgt.:  


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
Operations-Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 617-
635-9119 
Playground Equipment 
Facilities Mgt.:  
Operations-Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
617-635-9117 
Grants/External Funds 
Director of State & Federal Grants finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org617-635-9577 
Field Trips 
Transportation: Executive Director of Transportation 
Operations-Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 617-
635-9000 
Budget Management 
Assistant Budget Director, finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
617-635-6984 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Assistant Business Manager 
Department: 
Business Services 
Mailing Address: Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-8207 
Email: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
• Essential Training Guide is available here. 
• Business Services Guide is available here. 


