Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FIN-19 
Version 01 
 
 
 
BPS MAILROOM AND COPY CENTER GUIDELINES 
BPS POSTAGE & PRINTING POLICY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
OVERVIEW 
We are responsible for directing the operational performance of 
the mailroom and Copy Center to ensure an efficient, cost-
effective, and secure operation. Responsibilities include 
managing the processing of high-volume daily mail, loading and 
delivery of heavy shipments, scanning, copying, printing, and 
sending and receiving all sorts of documents. 
MAILROOM OPERATIONS 
Adhering to the following guidelines will facilitate a smoother 
operation of the mailroom at the Bolling Building: 
• Only school-related items will be processed through the 
mailroom for postage.  
o These items need to be properly sealed and bundled. 
o Items need to have a school return address. We need 
to know who is sending each mailing to keep track and 
to avoid missing undeliverable mail.  
• Each school/department will be charged for postage used. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-19 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
o Each school / department should have a budget line 
allocated for mailing purposes. 
• Personal mail will not be processed through the mailroom 
for postage (e.g., mortgage, utility, credit card payments, 
birthday cards, mail returns, etc.). 
o The mailroom is not responsible for receiving or storing 
personal deliveries (e.g., personal packages from 
Amazon, Walmart, Target, etc.). 
• All interoffice mail should be addressed as follows: 
o Name of person, school, and/or department where the 
mail should be delivered 
o Cluster number 
o Return address (who is sending the mail?) 
• Please do not put sticky notes on the outside of every 
envelope (adhesive glue could damage the postage 
machine). One per bundle is fine. 
• Advance notice is required for mailings of over 2000 pieces 
of mail. Please contact Mailroom & Copy Center by phone 
617-635-9075 or email, finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org. 
• Schools and departments will be charged for each mailing 
over 100 pieces of mail. 
• UPS, FEDEX, DHL: BPS does not have a business account 
with any shipping carriers.  
o All mail and packages intended to be shipped through 
any of these carriers should be prepaid by the sender. 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-19 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
COURIER SERVICES 
Also known as cluster mail, starting at the Bolling Building, our 
courier delivers and picks up interoffice mail 2 times a week to 
our cluster offices located throughout the district. Each school is 
a part of a cluster (previously known as zones, networks, TLTs) 
Adhering to the following guidelines will facilitate a smoother 
operation of the courier services: 
• The courier is an EXTERNAL vendor under contract, not BPS 
operated. 
• All mail should be clearly marked, including the sender and 
receiver. 
o Each school belongs to a cluster; if unsure, please 
contact the mailroom for the latest information. 
• The courier runs on Tuesday and Thursday of each week. 
• The current contract requires the courier to pick up no more 
than 3 bins of mail per cluster. 
o If on a certain day a cluster office has more than 3 bins 
of outgoing mail, the courier could pick up the excess 
on the next run. 
• The courier DOES NOT GO TO EACH SCHOOL. 
o Special runs can be requested at an additional charge 
paid to the vendor. 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-19 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
COPY CENTER OPERATIONS 
The BPS Copy Center provides various copy and printing 
functions. With our copying and finishing, we can have your 
manuals, student handbooks, presentations, letters to students, 
and much more completed in-house, saving BPS and the city 
money. 
● Our printing services offer: 
○ Mass production copying and printing. 
■ Black & White  
■ Color  
○ Posters up to 24x36 inches 
○ Three-hole punch  
○ Staple finishing 
● Printing services NOT offered by the BPS Copy Center: 
○ Envelopes 
○ Books 
○ Lamination 
○ Postcards 
○ Banners, etc. 
Adhering to the following guidelines will facilitate a smoother 
operation of our in-house printing services: 
● Printing services work on a first come-first served basis. 
● Advanced notice is required for all jobs. 
○ Please consider that there is a high volume of requests 
during the beginning and end of the school year, as 
well as during the summer as schools prepare for the 
new school year. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-19 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
CHARGES FOR PRINTING SERVICES 
Each job will be charged to the schools at lower than market 
cost. Please contact the Copy Center for the latest quote. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Mailroom & Copy Center 
Department: 
Business Services  
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9075 
E-mail: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
● Essential Training Guide is available here. 
● Business Services Guide is available here. 


