Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FIN-20 
Version 01 
 
MANAGING YOUR STIPENDS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Please use the Budget Office /Stipends reference document as 
your guide to initiating online stipend requests.  
 
DEFINITION OF STIPEND WORK FOR UNION POSITIONS (BTU, 
BASAS, GUILD) 
● Stipend work consists of activities that are distinct and 
separate from an individual’s job and not an extension of it.  
○ Some examples of stipend work include staff training 
beyond the contractual PD and Saturday or evening 
schools for teachers.  
● Stipend work is not to be performed during the period of 
time that constitutes the normal workday.  
● For BASAS staff, they must perform their school day hours 
for the year prior to being eligible for a stipend.  
 
DEFINITION OF STIPEND WORK FOR MANAGERIAL POSITIONS 
— SCHOOLS 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 2 of 13 
 
 
● Stipend work consists of activities that are distinct and 
separate from an individual’s job and not an extension of it. 
School-based managerial employees cannot receive a 
stipend unless their contractual school days (223) are 
completed. Stipend work is not to be performed during the 
period of time that constitutes the normal workday.  
● These stipends must be for activities that are outside of the 
job description of the managerial employee.  
● Stipend opportunities for managerial employees in schools 
must be posted in the school or on TalentEd.  
● To authorize a stipend request for an individual in a 
leadership position, Tiers D through F, the submitter will be 
required to attach one of the following to their request: the 
supervisor’s written approval, a signed superintendent’s 
memo, or an email approving the work. 
DEFINITION OF STIPEND WORK FOR MANAGERIAL POSITIONS 
— CENTRAL OFFICE 
● Stipend work consists of activities that are distinct and 
separate from an individual’s job and not an extension of it.  
● Stipend work is not to be performed during the period of 
time that constitutes the normal workday.  
● Managerial employees in central offices are only eligible to 
receive stipends that have been posted through the Office 
of Human Capital. These stipends must be for activities that 
are outside of the job description of the managerial 
employee.  
● Central office managerial employees may not apply for 
stipends unless they have been posted on TalentEd via the 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 3 of 13 
 
 
Office of Human Capital. Please connect with your OHC 
staffing manager if you are interested in posting a stipend 
opportunity on TalentEd. 
● To authorize a stipend request for an individual in a 
leadership position, Tiers D through F, the submitter will be 
required to attach one of the following to their request: the 
supervisor’s written approval, a signed superintendent’s 
memo, or an email approving the work. 
DEFINITION OF STIPEND WORK FOR SCHOOL LEADERS 
● Stipend work consists of activities that are distinct and 
separate from an individual’s job and not an extension of it.  
● Stipend work is not to be performed during the period of 
time that constitutes the normal workday.  
● School leader stipends must be for activities that are outside 
of the job description of the school leader.  
● In order for a school leader to receive a stipend, it must be 
either posted on TalentEd or the stipend request must be 
submitted along with a signed memo to the 
superintendent.  
DEFINITION OF STIPEND POSTING 
Stipend work must be offered to individuals at schools in 
accordance with the policies of the School Committee. 
Specifically, the work must be distributed equitably and based on 
demonstrated competence and qualifications.  
In schools, stipend opportunities must be posted to the staff. 
These postings may be internal to the school, so long as all non-


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 4 of 13 
 
 
managerial employees at the school have the opportunity to 
apply. An email to all school staff is an appropriate method of 
posting. OHC or Budget may ask for proof of posting at any time 
after a stipend authorization request (formerly referred to as a 
PS08) has been submitted. School-based managerial staff may 
apply to their school’s internal posting if eligible. School-based 
stipend opportunities can be posted on TalentEd as well. 
In central office departments, stipend opportunities must also be 
posted. These postings must be done through the Office of 
Human Capital. Central office managerial employees may not 
apply for stipends unless they have been posted on TalentEd via 
the Office of Human Capital.  
AUTHORIZATION TOOLS  
Stipend Authorization Request (SAR) – request for authorization 
before work starts (must be submitted at least two weeks prior to 
the first day of work). SARs for summer work should be 
submitted before the end of May. If an SAR is submitted after the 
work has started, the submitter is required to provide an 
explanation as part of the request. 
Pay Certification Request (formerly referred to as a PS09) – 
request for payment after work is completed (must be submitted 
no later than two weeks after the work is completed).  If an SPC is 
submitted after the work has started, the submitter is required to 
provide an explanation as part of the request. 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 5 of 13 
 
 
SCHEDULE FOR AUTHORIZATION 
Department heads or principals should plan in advance and 
request SARs on time.  
● SARs must be submitted at least two weeks before work 
starts, except in the case of summer work. If a stipend is 
requested late, the submitter will have to write in an 
explanation when prompted in the online system.  
● SARs for summer work should be submitted before the end 
of May.  
● Pay certification requests should be submitted no later than 
two weeks after the work has ended.  
● Pay certification requests that need to be processed in the 
last paycheck in June must be submitted by the Wednesday 
prior to the pay period end date.  
 
In addition, due to the Budget Collaborative and Probable Org 
schedule between December and February, please allow 
additional time for SAR approvals and submit them at least three 
weeks before work starts. 
AUTHORIZATION PROCESS  
All stipend work must be authorized in advance by the Office of 
Human Capital and Budget Office.  
Authorization from Budget and HC must be received via the 
approved SAR before the work starts. A department head does 
not have independent authority to authorize stipend work. 
Departments or schools are responsible for informing employees 
when a pay certification request has been submitted for 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 6 of 13 
 
 
payment. Please review the stipend guidance around submitting 
SARs and pay certification requests. Additional guidance on the 
stipend process can be found on the Budget Office 
Resources/Stipends page. 
WORKFLOW FOR STIPENDS 
1. Stipend work opportunity is posted (internally for schools 
and on TalentEd for central office) and individuals are 
chosen to perform this work. 
2. Secretary or department head’s designee originates stipend 
authorization request (SAR). 
a. Submitter cannot be one of the employees to receive a 
stipend. 
b. Submitter must complete the authorization process for 
all individuals that are flagged. This could include the 
following: 
i. Tier C, D, E, or F Managerial employees (will 
require approval by department head or division 
lead to be submitted along with the SAR) 
ii. School Leaders 
iii. Employees outside of the submitter’s department 
iv. Submitter must provide an explanation for any 
late requests 
3. Principal or department head gives first-level approval. 
4. HC reviews to confirm the below items for approval (please 
also see Process and Selection section for additional details 
on the OHC approval process): 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 7 of 13 
 
 
a. That the submitter isn’t a recipient of the stipend 
b. That the opportunity has been posted appropriately 
c. That the employee is eligible to receive the stipend 
d. That the Superintendent’s Memo has been submitted if 
the stipend is for school leaders. 
5. Payroll reviews to again confirm that the employee is 
eligible to receive the stipend. 
6. Budget reviews to confirm the below guidelines for 
approval: 
a. That there are enough funds available in the budget to 
cover the expense 
b. That the stipend funding information is correct, such as 
the budget year 
c. That the stipend is allowable under the grant if it is in 
fund 200 
d. That the commitment letter (which includes a 
description of the work, the staff member’s name, and 
the amount of the stipend) is attached to the stipend 
authorization request form (SAR) for Reimbursable 
grant stipends. 
e. That the hours worked are included if the stipend is 
above $5,000 for an individual 
f. That the budget director approves the stipend if it is 
above $10,000 for an individual 
7. Department or school should regularly monitor their 
stipend request for approval status updates. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 8 of 13 
 
 
8. Secretary or department head’s designee informs employee 
that work can start. 
9. Time sheets are maintained in the school or department 
and may be subject to periodic audits. 
10. Department head or principal monitors completion and 
quality of work. 
11. Work ends. 
12. Secretary or department head’s designee submits pay 
certification, due the Wednesday before the pay period end 
date. 
13. Payroll processes pay certification requests and checks for 
the following (see Payroll Guidelines, below): 
a. Confirm that the funds don’t go out prior to the end 
date. 
14. Stipend is paid to employee as a supplement to regular 
paycheck. 
NOTE: If an employee is listed on more than one eForm for 
various stipends, they cannot be paid out in the same pay period. 
A warning notice will appear when trying to add the additional 
stipend. Will have to hold that payment until the employee has 
been paid out by the other in-process pay certification request. 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 9 of 13 
 
 
BUDGET GUIDELINES 
All stipends and overtime payments are paid out of account 
51202.  
Stipend Authorization Requests (SAR): 
● Departments are responsible for tracking their original 
budget in 51202 and the SAR approvals that have been 
issued against this original budget. Contact your Financial 
Analyst if you have questions about your available funds for 
stipends. 
● SAR approvals do not “encumber” funds in the All Funds 
report. All 51202 funds will appear to be available until the 
pay certifications are paid out. In your All Funds report, 
please do not depend on the “Available” amount in account 
51202 to track stipends. Stipend requests must be tracked 
by the department; the Stipend Tracker template can be 
found here. 
● For all single stipend payments that amount to $5,000 or 
more per individual, please fill out the hourly rate portion of 
the SAR eForm.  
 
Stipend Pay Certification Requests: 
● Processed Stipend Pay Certification Requests will move 
funds from the Available budget to the Expense line.  
● It is possible to issue partial payment on a Stipend Pay 
Certification Requests if only some of the work was 
completed, or if only some of the employees should be paid. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 10 of 13 
 
 
● If the work ends early and you are paying out the full 
stipend before the end date on the form, you must leave a 
note to explain this on the Stipend Pay Certification 
Request. 
 
Stipends paid from grants: 
● Any stipend payments being made from a grant funding 
source need to be for work done during the grant time 
period. Stipends cannot be paid for work that may have 
begun before the start date of the grant or continuing after 
the grant end date. 
● All stipends on grants must be allowable under the grant, 
and it is the responsibility of the school or department to 
ensure that they are complying with grant guidelines. 
● For Reimbursable grant stipends, attach the commitment 
letter (which includes a description of the work, the staff 
member’s name, and the amount of the stipend) to the 
stipend authorization request form (SAR). 
PROCESS AND SELECTION 
● Departments must ensure that the activities covered by 
overtime and stipend requests meet and conform to the 
definitions listed at the top of this circular.  
● Departments are expected to internally post and advertise 
opportunities to ensure that individuals do not receive a 
disproportionate share of overtime and stipend 
assignments.  


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 11 of 13 
 
 
● For stipends that managerial employees in central offices 
may receive, the posting must be done via the Office of 
Human Capital. 
● Departments are expected to select qualified individuals 
and make selections in an equitable way. 
● Departments must ensure that the work is done in a 
complete and satisfactory way before issuing authorization 
for payment.  
● Timesheets are required for those working overtime or 
stipended hours.  
● Timesheets for all stipends and overtime must be retained 
in a central location at the department for 7 years. 
The Office of Human Capital may inquire with a department to 
be sure that it is specifically conforming to these guidelines and 
procedures. 
SINGLE OR CUMULATIVE PAYMENT THRESHOLDS 
In circumstances where the single payment to an individual or 
the sum of payments in one fiscal year to an individual meets the 
thresholds in the table below, there is an additional approval 
requirement. 
 
 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 12 of 13 
 
 
 
Single or 
Cumulative  
Stipend 
Amount 
Non-Autonomous School  
Approval Process 
 Central Office 
 Approval Process 
Greater than 
or equal to 
$5,000 
Depending on the situation, 
stipend authorization may be 
held at HC or Budget 
approval step for further 
questions. You will be 
required to submit the hours 
worked and hourly rate for 
stipends amounting to $5,000 
or more for an individual. 
Depending on the 
situation, a stipend 
authorization may be held 
at the HC or Budget 
approval step for further 
questions.  
Greater than 
or equal to 
$10,000 
Budget director approval 
required. When submitting a 
stipend authorization that 
amounts to $10,000 or more 
per individual, please fill out 
the hourly rate portion of the 
stipend authorization eForm. 
Please send an email 
explaining the reasons for 
exceeding this threshold to 
your financial analyst in the 
Budget Office. 
Budget director approval 
is required. When 
submitting a stipend 
authorization, please send 
an email explaining the 
reasons for exceeding this 
threshold to your financial 
analyst in the Budget 
Office.  
There are no additional approvals necessary for autonomous 
schools that submit single or cumulative stipends greater than or 
equal to $5,000. 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-20 
Page 13 of 13 
 
 
The stipend thresholds for single or cumulative payments listed 
above are not impacted by: 
● Regular differential payments for employees in a formal 
Extended Learning program 
● Regular differentials for academic coaches or athletic 
coaches 
● Regular differentials for lead teachers 
● Regular payments to instructors in formal Summer School 
and Acceleration Academies 
● Regular inclusion buyback payments for employees who 
use more than one certification while teaching in the 
classroom. 
 
Please use the Budget Office /Stipends reference document as 
your guide to initiating online stipend requests.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Finance 
Department: 
Budget Office 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street. Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9000 
Email: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


