Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-05 
Version 01 
 
 
 
PERMIT ACTIVITIES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
PERMIT REQUEST PROCESS FOR ALL BPS BUILDINGS 
Any activity taking place in a school building after school hours 
requires a permit, including activities during school vacation 
weeks, holidays, and summer months. 
ALL PERSONS WILL BE DENIED ACCESS TO BPS BUILDINGS IF 
NO PERMIT HAS BEEN REQUESTED AND APPROVED BY THE 
SCHOOL AND FACILITIES MANAGEMENT.  
Permits are to be electronically submitted through SchoolDude 
at least two weeks (minimum) before the event, so it is advisable 
to submit your request when the activity/event is scheduled and 
confirmed.  
For external (non-BPS) users:  
• Access link: Facilities Mgt. Community Use Monthly 
Calendar  
• Please see the CommunityUse Requester Guide for more 
information about how an outside organization accesses the 
system and submits requests.  
• Please see the FSRequester Guide, which includes video and 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-05 
Page 2 of 9 
 
 
 
picture how-to guides for submitting requests once you are 
logged in.  
For internal (BPS) users:  
• Single Sign On: From the nine-dot grid in the top right of 
your Gmail screen, click “More,” then click the SchoolDude 
icon (looks like a cartoon face).  
• SchoolDude log in screen 
• Please see How to Submit a Schedule Request, which 
includes video and picture how-to guides for submitting 
requests once you are logged in. 
• Once an organization or BPS staff member has submitted a 
request, it will be routed to the school leader or their 
designee for approval. Please see Processing Schedules for 
more information about how to manage approvals.  
If an independent third party (NOT a BPS or BPS partner 
organization) submits a permit request form to use or 
occupy school property for an event at which attendance is 
expected to exceed 60 people, or at which there is a charge 
for admission, the party shall be required to hire a School 
Police detail, at the third party’s own expense, to be present 
for the duration of their use of the property. 
Please Note: The routing process for summer will be different 
from the school year process. [See page 4 of this circular.] For 
summer programs, requests will go first to BPS Facilities, then 
the school leader will receive notification of the approval of 
building use.  


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-05 
Page 3 of 9 
 
 
 
CUSTODIAL HOURS AND OVERTIME 
The applicant is responsible for custodial overtime, utilities fees, 
and building usage fees, if applicable. Schools and other 
applicants may also be responsible for overtime if the event 
occurs before or after a building is closed, on a weekend, holiday, 
or school vacation, and/or when the building is open if additional 
custodial coverage is required, as determined by Facilities 
Management. Payment in the form of a certified check or money 
order made out to Boston Public Schools is required prior to the 
permit activity occurring.  
For all activities and events that occur when the building is 
closed, the custodian(s) will open the building one-half hour prior 
to the entrance of the applicant to the building and will close the 
building one-half hour after the applicant exits the building. 
Groups requesting building space must abide by their requested 
permit hours.  
REQUEST FOR BUILDING USE BY COMMUNITY USERS 
All the above conditions apply, with the addition that outside 
groups must pay a building usage fee. A fee is charged per 
space.  
An invoice for all Facilities Management permit fees will be sent 
by the Facilities Management Department via the SchoolDude 
building permitting system with the actual fees that the 
requester will be charged. Custodial coverage is determined by 
the number of people and the amount of space used by the 
applicant. 
Staffing Minimum 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-05 
Page 4 of 9 
 
 
 
Up to 150 people = 1 Senior Custodian  
Up to 350 people = 1 Senior Custodian and 1 Junior Custodian  
Up to 450 people = 1 Senior Custodian and 2 Junior Custodians  
 
An additional hour is added to the permit hours (one-half hour to 
open and one-half to close).  
If a custodian works overtime, principals/heads of schools should 
work with their area managers to ensure that the custodian has 
meaningful work to do (a predetermined work schedule) during 
overtime hours. Custodians are expected to remain on the school 
premises while on overtime and perform the scheduled work. 
Custodial opening and closing times (one-half hour before and 
after) are figured into the permit hours. Requesters DO NOT need 
to include this time in the request. 
GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS 
Responsibility for Use:  
• It is expressly understood and agreed that the regulations of 
the School Committee are to be strictly complied with. The 
requester/organization may refer to the BPS Superintendent 
Circulars for BPS Policies and Procedures.  
• The requester/organization assumes full responsibility for 
any injury to or loss of city property as a consequence of 
such use of the above-described accommodations and 
engages to make the same good without the expense to the 
city. The requester/organization further agrees to pay the 
charge for the light, heat, custodians, security, and other 
service as required.  
• BPS gymnasiums: Requester/organization assumes all 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-05 
Page 5 of 9 
 
 
 
responsibility for the proper use and protection of the 
facilities provided in the school. Requester/organization 
must not allow persons to use these facilities over whom 
they have no control.  
The organization, their participants, and spectators are 
prohibited from any part of the building other than the 
gymnasium. Organization shall enter the school through 
one entrance.  Entry doors are NOT to be propped open to 
allow unauthorized individuals to enter the building.  It will 
be the responsibility of the organization to station an 
individual at the designated entrance to ensure only 
participants of that program are allowed in. Once all 
participants are allowed in, all doors should be closed and 
secured. 
Supervision: The applicant/organization must provide sufficient 
supervisory personnel to ensure proper supervision for the safety 
of members/guests and regulate responsible usage. The 
organization will be responsible for all costs incurred to repair any 
damage done to the premises. Custodial employees are not 
available for supervising the premises but do have obligations 
connected with cleaning and maintenance of the building.  
Licenses: In addition to the permit required by the regulations of 
the School Committee, for any exhibition or entertainment where 
an admission fee will be required, a license under the provisions 
of Chapter 348 of the Special Acts of 1915 must be obtained. This 
license can be obtained by applying to the Mayor of the City of 
Boston and paying the required fee. No such license is required 
for entertainment in school buildings by or for the benefit of the 
pupils thereof, and under the supervision of the principal/head of 
school.  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-05 
Page 6 of 9 
 
 
 
Police Attendance: If admission is charged, the person to whom 
the permit is issued must make provisions for BPS School Police 
attendance. If a school building is occupied outside of school 
hours by third-party programs, sufficient BPS School Police 
attendance is necessary if there are sixty (60) or more persons 
occupying the facility. A BPS School Police detail is the sole 
responsibility of the renter(s). If BPS School Police are not in 
attendance, BPS Facilities Management may cancel the permit 
and exclude all persons from the building.  
Time for Filing Permit Requests: Building permit requests during 
the school year must be submitted. No definite and final 
reservations are made until (1) the request is approved by the 
principal/head of school and (2) Facilities Management has given 
final approval and activated the permit.  
Gymnasium Permit Start and End Date:  Gymnasium permits will 
begin the last week of September and end two (2) weeks prior to 
the closing of school.  
Alcohol, Smoking, and Food Regulations: According to state law, 
alcoholic beverages are not allowed in public school buildings. 
Consumption of food and/or beverages is not permitted in the 
auditorium or conference rooms. Smoking is not permitted in any 
school building.  
Payment: Personal/company checks; certified bank checks, 
and/or money orders will be accepted as forms of payment. Cash, 
credit cards, and money transfers are not accepted forms of 
payment. Any check returned for insufficient funds will be 
charged an additional $25.00. 
Right to Cancel: Heads of schools/principals reserve the right to 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-05 
Page 7 of 9 
 
 
 
request cancellation of any requested permit activity occurring at 
their facility. BPS Central Administration will make final 
determinations regarding principal/head of school cancellation 
requests. BPS Central Administration has the right to cancel any 
permit in violation of BPS building usage and/or safety policies.  
Obligation to Clean: Requester is obligated to clean and organize 
any used building space and return the building space to the 
state it was found it. If the space is not suitably cleaned and/or 
returned to the state it was in prior to use, the requester may be 
charged additional custodial and/or other fees and may lose the 
privilege of using any BPS facility in the future.  
School Closures: If schools are closed due to inclement weather 
or other emergencies, all permits are automatically 
canceled/suspended for the duration of the inclement weather or 
other emergency. Gymnasiums are not available for rental during 
holidays and Christmas, February, April, and summer vacations.  
Weekend Use:  If snow is forecast, Facilities Management cannot 
guarantee that parking lots will be cleared for scheduled events.  
Organizations are urged to contact Facilities Management to 
cancel when necessary. You may contact the area manager on 
duty through Municipal Protective Services at 617-635-4844 to 
cancel. 
PERMITS DURING SUMMER TERMS  
Permit Approval: Summer permit requests will be routed first to 
BPS Facilities. The school leader will then receive notification of 
the approval of building use. 
Permit Start and End Date: Summer programs may operate in 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-05 
Page 8 of 9 
 
 
 
BPS buildings between July 8 and August 9, 2024, with one day 
of setup to be arranged with the school leader prior to July 1, 
2024. Gymnasium permits will begin one week after the opening 
of school and end one week prior to the closing of school.  
Student and Employee Attendance: Programs operating in BPS 
buildings must record daily student and staff attendance to be 
available upon request.  
Identification: During the summer, all adults working in any BPS 
building must wear an identifying name badge indicating at 
minimum their full name and organization/program name. 
Specifications for employees working in BPS buildings during 
summer staff are as follows:  
• BPS summer staff: All BPS employees must wear their BPS 
issued ID.  
• Non-BPS summer staff hired via OHC external hiring 
process: All non-BPS summer staff must wear their BPS 
Summer ID issued by OHC at their Welcome Session.  
• Community-based program staff: Must wear a visible 
organizational ID badge every day during the program. 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS FACILITIES RENTAL FEES 
All events and functions to be held in Boston Public School 
buildings will be implemented in accordance with the following 
fee schedule. 
One Time Event ··········· $515.00/event 
Continuous Usage ······ $2,575.00 per 10 events 
Utilities  ·························· $95.00/hour 
Senior Custodian ········· $49.00/hour 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-05 
Page 9 of 9 
 
 
 
Junior Custodian ········· $37.00/hour 
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner:  
Assistant Director, Building Services 
Department:  
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 
Campbell Resource Center, 1216 Dorchester 
Ave, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-9162 
Fax:  
617-635-9306 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


