Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
FMT-15 
Version 01 
 
 
 
ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL INSPECTION/AUDIT 
PROGRAM 
CONDUCTED BY BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS & BOSTON 
PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION 
 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
POLICY 
To fully meet the intent and requirements of the City of Boston’s 
Indoor Air Quality Ordinance (7.12.1-4), Boston Public Schools 
(BPS) and the Boston Public Health Commission (BPHC) have 
designated an Indoor Air Quality Unit which shall ensure that a 
minimum of two facility inspections per occupied school building 
are completed on an annual basis. A report with an assessment 
of conditions at each site will be developed by BPS and BPHC 
and presented to school principals/heads of schools and 
published on the BPS website annually.  
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
The Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) Unit responsible for completing the 
annual BPS environmental inspections/audit (inspection) will be 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-15 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
comprised of representatives from BPS Facilities Management’s 
Environmental Division and the BPHC’s Office of Environmental 
Health.  
The IAQ Unit will conduct two inspections of each occupied BPS 
owned or operated building during the academic school year. 
The inspections will begin after the beginning of the academic 
school year and will be completed by the end of the academic 
year of the following year. An environmental audit will be done by 
the BPS and the BPHC. 
The inspection report will investigate and note environmental 
conditions in each report. The inspectors will test and look for 
health and safety conditions throughout the interior and exterior 
of each building including but not be limited to: general 
sanitation and housekeeping; water-staining, leaks, and mold; 
general building repair; signs of pest infestation and activity; 
general life safety; unobstructed means of egress; bathroom 
sanitation, hygiene, and operability; general ventilation, etc.  
Upon completion of the annual environmental inspection, 
Facilities Management will immediately address critical health 
and safety deficiencies by filing a work order with the appropriate 
division. They will incorporate other needed work at the school 
sites into the annual budgeting process. On an ongoing basis, 
Facilities Management will provide technical assistance to 
principals/heads of schools on environmental problems and 
other building-related issues.  
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-15 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
September  Environmental inspections will begin after the 
beginning of the academic school year. 
Ongoing  
Principals/heads of schools will receive a detailed 
inspection report following completion of the 
building inspection. 
June  
Environmental inspections of all school buildings 
will be completed by the end of the academic year. 
August 31 
 
Environmental inspection reports to be posted on 
the BPS website (linked from 
https://www.bostonpublicschools.org/domain/175) 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Sr. Environmental Supervisor 
Department: 
Facilities Management  
Mailing 
Address: 
1216 Dorchester Avenue, Dorchester, MA, 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-8300 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
                                                                                           Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


