Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-10 
 Version 01 
 
INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT (IPM)  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
MISSION STATEMENT  
To further ensure a healthy and safe learning and work 
environment at all Boston Public School (BPS) buildings, BPS will 
be implementing a systemwide IPM program. IPM is a holistic 
approach to control pest activity and to reduce pesticide usage in 
the building and surrounding landscape.  
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN  
A key component of an effective IPM plan is the selection of an 
IPM coordinator. The IPM coordinator should be someone with 
administrative authority to adequately enforce and implement 
the program. The IPM coordinator acts as a representative of the 
principal. The IPM coordinator is required to establish an IPM 
Committee, which will include interested stockholders (e.g., 
custodian(s), after school program, community school (as 
applicable), food service manager, teacher, etc.).  
State laws and regulations require all school buildings and 
licensed daycares to register an indoor and outdoor IPM plan 
with the Massachusetts Department of Agricultural Resources 
(MDAR). The law requires the IPM plans to be updated and 
registered annually. The pest control contractor (PCC) is 
responsible to annually update the indoor and outdoor plan.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-10 
Page 2 of 7 
 
All IPM plans must be updated annually by the pest control 
contractor by December 1. The PCC will meet with the 
principal/head of school or designee to update the plan. The 
updates will include but not be limited to technical components, 
pest treatment products, and devices of the IPM plan. The 
principal/head of school or designated representative (i.e., IPM 
coordinator) will provide the PCC with the school's information, 
including but not limited to school name and address, name of 
principal/head of school, IPM coordinator’s name, IPM Committee 
members, etc. 
The logbook must contain the following sections: 
• A copy of the MDAR approved indoor and outdoor IPM 
plan 
• Complaint/sighting forms 
• Pest control contractor inspection and treatment reports 
• Treatment product health and safety information (similar 
to a material safety data sheet)  
• Pest control contractor (PCC) information (name and 
address of company, contact person, telephone number, 
etc.) 
NOTE: It’s very important that all pest problems/issues be 
entered into the logbook to ensure problem areas are treated 
during monthly inspections.  
MONTHLY INSPECTION  
1. All PCCs working in BPS facilities will be familiar with 
the BPS IPM protocol.  
2. Prior to the start of any service, the PCC will report to 
the main office and review the IPM logbook for recent 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-10 
Page 3 of 7 
 
entries. 
3. The PCC will conduct a monthly inspection of all school 
buildings. The minimum inspection will include a 
physical inspection and assessment of the following 
areas, noting IPM related deficiencies:  
a. Food prep and storage areas  
b. Dumpster and waste storage areas  
c. Loading and receiving areas  
d. Building grounds  
e. Teacher’s lounge  
f. Entry points or connections from a mechanical 
space or crawl space  
g. Boiler room area, mechanical rooms, and 
moveable storage areas  
h. Storage rooms, sinks, and custodial storerooms  
i. Noted rooms with recent complaints (those 
areas/rooms marked with a complaint after the 
last service call)  
j. Other suspected areas  
4. Temporarily seal all potential rodent access holes or 
voids (< 3 in. diameter), including voids around pipes 
and duct penetrations or any other penetrations. The 
PCC will only use approved sealants. The PCC will 
provide product specifications for sealants prior to any 
use in BPS facilities. The Alterations and Repairs 
supervisor will be contacted to permanently seal any 
penetrations.  
5. The PCC will vacuum any rodent droppings around any 
area where traps, glue boards, monitoring stations, etc. 
have been placed.  
6. The PCC will inspect the above noted areas and make 
recommendations for enhanced treatment as 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-10 
Page 4 of 7 
 
necessary.  
7. The PCC will provide electronic copies of any IPM 
inspection, treatment, or service via email to the 
school’s email address, to the environmental supervisor 
or specialist with BPS and Food Services.  
The pest control contractor or the school will notify and seek 
approval from BPS Environmental Division for any additional IPM 
treatments, service calls, or inspections beyond the monthly 
treatment. This request must be made through or verified by 
email confirmation.  
A quality IPM program must effectively control the following 
conditions:  
• Rodent entry points and access  
• Harborage and clutter  
• Food source and sanitation  
• Moisture  
The IPM coordinator must review the IPM logbook immediately 
following each inspection. The coordinator will create a work 
order request addressed to the environmental supervisor for 
treatment or necessary repairs.  
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-10 
Page 5 of 7 
 
Clutter is a major issue that needs to be addressed for an 
effective IPM program. Clutter creates harborage for pests 
and limits full treatment. Clutter is defined as storage 
which:  
1. Impedes egresses  
2. Limits safe movement throughout the area  
3. Blocks and limits access to essential mechanical, utility, 
and emergency equipment  
4. Becomes stagnant: boxes or materials left on the floor 
that show signs of deterioration, water damage, or pest 
activity  
All unnecessary unwanted or contaminated materials must be 
removed. 
BED BUG PROTOCOL FOR BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS  
Bed bugs are becoming a more common pest problem that 
could impact the general quality of life but are not known to 
transmit any diseases. Bed bugs are small (less than ¼ inch in 
diameter), brownish, flattened insects that are known to bite 
people when they are asleep. The bites often may not be felt but 
can cause itchiness and swelling. Unlike some other insects (e.g., 
head lice), bed bugs do not live on people but may hitchhike on 
one’s personal items (backpacks, clothing, books, etc.) to get into 
a school building. Bed bug infestations are uncommon in 
schools, but since they may get in by other means, schools need 
to be proactive.  
School’s Response Actions:  
1. The school’s IPM coordinator, principal, or head of 
school must be notified.  
2. Write the complaint in your school’s IPM logbook 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-10 
Page 6 of 7 
 
which is kept in your main office. Please provide details 
in your complaint without divulging anyone’s personal 
information. A complaint should be logged for any 
suspect bed bugs. 
3. Contact the Facilities Management, Environmental 
Division at 617-635-8300.  
4. If you can capture the insect, place it in a sealed clear 
plastic bag (Ziploc) for identification. The pest control 
contractor (PCC) will come by to identify the insect as 
soon as possible.  
5. If a student has been identified with a bed bug, the 
personal belongings of all students in the room should 
be bagged and sealed tightly.  
6. A student who has suspect bite marks should see the 
school nurse as soon as possible.  
7. The school nurse will contact the student’s parent or 
guardian to provide them with contact information for 
the Boston Public Health Commission to arrange a bed 
bug inspection.  
For more information, please visit the link below:  
https://bphc.org/whatwedo/healthy-homes-
environment/Documents/bedbug_fact_sheet. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-10 
Page 7 of 7 
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES  
ACTIVITY  
TIMELINE 
Copy of this year’s Superintendent’s 
Circular included in IPM book 
Annually by October 1 
Pest control contractors will annually 
review and update indoor and outdoor 
IPM plans, register with 
Massachusetts Department of 
Agricultural Resources, and submit to 
Facilities Management. 
Annually by December 1 
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner:  
Sr. Environmental Supervisor 
Department:  
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address:  1216 Dorchester Avenue, Dorchester MA, 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-8300 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


