Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FMT-20 
Version 01 
 
DRINKING WATER ACCESS POLICY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
The Drinking Water Access Policy is for all water units used for 
drinking and food preparation. 
STATEMENT OF COMMITMENT 
Boston Public Schools (BPS) will safely bring online and maintain 
all school building water units used for drinking and food 
preparation. 
BACKGROUND  
By law, all students must have access to water during meals and 
throughout the school day, at no cost. BPS follows the Healthy, 
Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010, Massachusetts Legislation (H 4459) 
223(g), and Massachusetts Uniform State Plumbing Code (248 
MASS. CODE REGS. § 10.10, Table 1 (2011). 
Boston Water & Sewer Commission (http://www.bwsc.org/) is the 
Public Water System (PWS) that supplies potable water to BPS. 
BPS also upholds a bottled water contract. 
 
BPS, like all school districts, is responsible for following the 
guidance of the US Lead Contamination Control Act (LCCA). The 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 2 of 21 
 
 
 
LCCA directs the United States Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) and its state designees to assist school system 
administrators, schools, and programs, to identify and reduce or 
eliminate lead contamination in their facilities’ drinking water. 
The LCCA is an assistance-based, non-regulatory program.  
 
As a federal designee and the responsible Massachusetts agency, 
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection 
(MassDEP) is responsible for educating school/facility officials 
about the LCCA and coordinating statewide efforts to reduce or 
eliminate lead in drinking water at schools and childcare 
facilities. The Massachusetts program includes both lead and 
copper because the same mechanism that leaches lead from 
plumbing into drinking can also leach copper. Additional 
information on the MassDEP Drinking Water Program is available 
at https://www.mass.gov/lead-in-drinking-water.  
POLICY 
In accordance with the EPA’s revised 3Ts for Reducing Lead in 
Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities Toolkit 
(https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/3ts-
reducing-lead-drinking-water-toolkit), and the subsequent 
recommendations from MassDEP, BPS is committed to the 
following drinking water access policy: 
1. Annually test all water units used for drinking and food 
preparation. 
2. Deactivate any unit with test results above or equal to 15 
parts per billion (ppb) for lead and or 1,300 ppb for copper 
and implement remediation actions to reduce those levels 
to the lowest possible concentrations. Remediation actions 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 3 of 21 
 
 
 
may include, but not be limited to, daily flushing, installation 
of filtration systems, and/or replacement of drinking water 
fixtures, plumbing fixtures, and/or piping. 
3. Continue to use units with test results between 1 ppb and 15 
ppb for lead, while implementing short and long-term 
remediation actions to reduce those levels to the lowest 
possible concentrations. 
4. Communicate all test results and subsequent actions. 
5. Provide bottled water and cups for any deactivated, offline 
schools and any online schools that lack access to fountains 
in food service and medical areas. 
6. Provide drinking water access training for relevant BPS staff 
in accordance with this policy. 
DEFINITIONS 
• EPA’s 3 T’s for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water: Training, 
Testing, and Taking Action, 3Ts for Reducing Lead in 
Drinking Water | US EPA.  
• Deactivation Level, Copper:  ≥1,300 ppb  
• Deactivation Level, Lead:  ≥15 ppb 
• Water Unit: Any water fountain or food service 
equipment/fixture (e.g., food preparation sink faucets, 
kettles, tilt skillets, etc.) 
• Online School: A school building supplied by online water 
units as its primary source of drinking water. (see definition: 
Online Water Unit) 
• Online Water Unit: An active water unit, with verified lead 
and copper concentrations below deactivation levels, for 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 4 of 21 
 
 
 
drinking and/or food preparation. Concentrations are 
verified by the required testing.  
• Offline School: A school building provided with a 
commercial bottled water supply as its only source of 
drinking water. 
• Offline Water Unit: A deactivated water unit supplied by the 
PWS for drinking and/or food preparation with verified lead 
and or copper concentrations above deactivation levels.   
• Activation: A change in a water unit’s (e.g., water fountain or 
food service equipment and fixtures) status from offline to 
online due to initial installation or remediation action(s) and 
subsequent testing demonstrating the lowest possible 
concentrations for lead and copper. 
• Deactivation: A change in a water unit’s (e.g., water fountain 
or food service equipment and fixtures) status from online 
to offline. Any online water unit with elevated lead or copper 
levels above deactivation levels will be deactivated. 
Deactivated units will remain deactivated until remediation 
action(s) have been completed and the remediated unit has 
been re-tested with subsequent test levels at the lowest 
possible concentrations for lead and copper. 
• Flushing: Turning on a plumbing cold water fixture(s) and 
letting the cold water run continuously for a specified time 
frame in accordance with MassDEP protocols.   
• Daily Flushing:  For high use areas, such as fixtures used for 
food preparation (e.g., food preparation sink faucets, kettles, 
tilt skillets, etc.), BPS will adhere to MassDEP’s flushing 
guidance for schools, available at Fact Sheet – Flushing: A 
Short-Term Solution to Reduce Lead and Copper. For any 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 5 of 21 
 
 
 
online water fountain, it is recommended that the drinker 
first let the water run for 5-10 seconds before drinking, and 
this is only for precautionary measures as lead and copper 
concentrations were already verified to be below 
deactivation levels. For directly plumbed water units where 
flushing is not feasible (e.g., combination ovens, steamers, 
ice makers, etc.), filters have already been or will be 
installed.   
• Activation Flushing: BPS will adhere to a minimum flushing 
time of 20 minutes for activation of offline water units, per 
the activation protocol. 
• Remediation Action(s):  Shall include, but are not limited to 
replacement, repair, maintenance, filtration, and/or flushing 
to reduce the concentration of lead and copper to the 
lowest possible concentrations. 
 
REQUIREMENTS 
Per the Annual Testing Protocol (pg. 8), BPS Facilities 
Management Environmental Division will annually test all online 
water units used for drinking and food preparation for lead and 
copper concentrations. BPS annual testing will adhere to 
MassDEP’s guidance for sample collection procedures for schools 
and early education childcare facilities, available at the following 
link: Sampling for Lead and Copper at Schools and Childcare 
Facilities | Mass.gov. This testing protocol does not include any 
sinks used for facility cleaning or handwashing, including but not 
limited to those found in utility rooms, bathrooms, locker rooms, 
kitchens, science labs, prep rooms, and classrooms. These sinks 
are not to be used for drinking or any other consumptive purpose 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 6 of 21 
 
 
 
such as food preparation, and signage shall be posted as such. 
• In cases where concentrations of lead and or copper in any 
water unit do not exceed the lead/copper deactivation 
levels, no deactivation is needed. Test results will be 
available at: BPS Water / Boston School Water Quality. Units 
with results between 1 ppb and 15 ppb for lead will continue 
to be used, while BPS Facilities Management implements 
short or long-term remediation actions to reduce those 
levels to the lowest possible concentrations.  
• In cases where concentrations of lead and or copper in 
water units used for drinking or food preparation exceed 
the lead/copper deactivation levels, BPS Facilities 
Management and BPS Communications will enact the 
Deactivation Protocol (pg. 10), which requires BPS Facilities 
Management Plumbing Division to immediately deactivate 
only the impacted online water unit(s), and place signage 
that says “Water Shut Off. Do NOT turn on without Facilities 
Management or FNS (Food and Nutrition Services) 
Approval.” For water units used for drinking, the units will 
also be tagged with a “DO NOT DRINK”.  
• In cases where water sources are not tested for lead or 
copper (because these units are not designated for drinking 
or food preparation), signage has been conspicuously 
placed (as of September 1, 2016) near that source stating: 
“WATER FROM SINKS WILL BE USED FOR WASHING ONLY.” 
Pictures will be used in locations as needed. BPS 
principals/heads of school will designate a responsible 
person to check and ensure this signage is posted in 
bathrooms and classrooms on a regular basis. BPS Facilities 
Management will provide the signage and can be contacted 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 7 of 21 
 
 
 
for additional or replacement signage. 
• BPS will follow the Activation Protocol (pg. 12) to safely bring 
online school building water units used for drinking, food 
preparation, or medical services. 
• BPS will follow the Flushing Protocol (pg. 13) as one 
remediation practice for reducing lead levels to the lowest 
possible concentrations. 
• BPS Facilities Management will follow the Filter and Filtered 
Water Fountain Standard Operating Procedure and 
Maintenance Protocol (pg. 13) to manage all filtered water 
fountains and filters. 
• BPS Facilities Management will follow the Bottled Water 
Protocol (pg. 16), which includes providing bottled water, 
bottled water units, and cups for all offline schools, and for 
any medical or food service areas that lack access to tap 
water units in any online school. BPS Facilities Management 
will manage and track all bottled water accounts.  
• BPS Facilities Management will provide water testing results 
and any recent water-related information to BPS 
Communications for the BPS water webpage, 
http://www.bostonpublicschools.org/water and annual 
notices to the BPS community.  
• Heads of school/principals will develop a school-based plan 
for ensuring bottled water and cups are available 
continuously, without disruption, on all water coolers 
throughout the entire school day, including during 
mealtimes. Schools are responsible for calling Facilities 
Management to order water and cups, if running low before 
the existing, regular water delivery schedule. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 8 of 21 
 
 
 
• BPS Department of Health & Wellness will educate, 
promote, and communicate the importance and benefits of 
drinking water and collaborate with Facilities Management 
and Food and Nutrition Services to communicate all aspects 
of this policy to school leaders, staff, students, and school 
community. 
• In alignment with BuildBPS, BPS will integrate water 
infrastructure improvements into routine renovations and 
capital planning and develop a water infrastructure plan for 
schools that are offline with a goal of bringing all BPS 
schools online. 
IMPLEMENTATION PROTOCOLS: TESTING, MAINTENANCE, & 
ACCESS  
Annual Testing Protocol 
BPS annual testing will adhere to MassDEP’s guidance for 
Sample Collection Procedures for schools and early education 
childcare facilities, available at the following link: Sampling for 
Lead and Copper at Schools and Childcare Facilities | Mass.gov. 
How to Collect a First Draw Sample 
1. Collect the sample before any water has been used.  Water 
units must be unused for at least eight (8) hours, but not 
more than eighteen (18) hours, before testing.   
2. Sampler must wear chemical resistant Nitrile gloves while 
sampling. 
3. Complete the sample collection form during all sampling 
(Sample Custody Log - MA DEP LCCA Program or 
equivalent). 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 9 of 21 
 
 
 
4. Only use containers (250 milliliter/wide mouth) supplied by 
a certified laboratory. 
5. Containers should not be opened until you are ready to 
collect the sample. 
6. Sampling containers that have been compromised in any 
way (e.g., by being touched on the threads or the interior 
surfaces) must not be used. 
7. Keep any food and drink away from the sample and its 
container. 
8. If the fixture/faucet has an aerator at the end of the fixture, it 
should not be removed before taking samples. The sampler 
should not remove or clean any aerators prior to or during 
the collection of tap samples. Make sure no water has been 
withdrawn from the tap or water fountain, as well as from 
any adjacent taps, before the sample has been collected.   
9. Place the container under the water unit that is being 
tested and collect 250 milliliters (mL) of water.  
10. For all water units being tested, make sure you turn on the 
cold water tap. Open the cold water tap and run it as you 
would when filling a glass of water. 
11. Turn on the water and fill the container without allowing 
any water to run down the drain or the outsides of the 
container. 
12. Close the container according to the instructions from your 
certified lab. Tightly cap the sample bottle and place in the 
sample (shipping) kit provided. 
13. Make sure the container is labeled with the same 
information from your sample collection form (Sample 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 10 of 21 
 
 
 
Custody Log - MA DEP LCCA Program or equivalent). 
14. Prepare the container for shipping according to the certified 
lab's instructions. Ship containers according to the certified 
lab's instructions. 
15. Samples must be delivered and relinquished to a certified 
lab within 14 (fourteen) days of collection for proper testing. 
Deactivation Protocol 
1. In cases where concentrations of lead and or copper in any 
water unit do not exceed the lead/copper deactivation 
levels, no deactivation is needed.  Test results will be 
available at: https://www.bostonpublicschools.org/water. 
Units with results between 1 ppb and 15 ppb for lead will 
continue to be used, while BPS Facilities Management 
implements short or long-term remediation actions to 
reduce those levels to the lowest possible concentrations.  
2. In cases where concentrations of lead and or copper in 
water units used for drinking or food preparation exceed the 
lead/copper deactivation levels: 
a. Upon notification from the BPS Sustainability and 
Environmental Resources Manager, BPS Facilities 
Management Plumbing Division will immediately 
deactivate only the impacted online water unit(s), 
unless otherwise specifically directed.  These units will 
be made offline and tagged “Water Shut Off. Do NOT 
turn on without Facilities Management or FNS (Food 
and Nutrition Services) Approval.”  For water units used 
for drinking, the units will be tagged with a “DO NOT 
DRINK”. If required, a bottled water unit will be placed 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 11 of 21 
 
 
 
as near as possible to the deactivated unit. 
b. BPS Facilities Management will provide bottled water, 
bottled water coolers, and cups.  One bottled water 
cooler will be provided for each deactivated water unit 
(e.g. water fountain) or as necessary to meet 248 CMR 
10.00: Uniform State Plumbing  Code requirements 
(See: Table 1: Minimum Facilities For Building 
Occupancy, available at the following link: 248 CMR 
10.00: Uniform state plumbing code). . 
c. BPS Communications and Facilities Management will 
immediately implement the Deactivation 
Communications Protocol (pg. 18). 
d. BPS Facilities Management Environmental and 
Plumbing Divisions will inspect the impacted water 
unit to identify any source or cause of elevation and 
schedule any remediation action(s).     
e. The impacted water unit will remain deactivated until 
remediation actions have been completed and BPS 
Facilities Management Environmental Division has 
tested and received three (3) consecutive lead and 
copper sample results at the lowest possible 
concentrations. 
3. In cases where water sources are not tested for lead or 
copper (because these units are not designated for drinking 
or consumption) or levels of lead in water units exceed the 
lead/copper action level, signage has been conspicuously 
placed near that source stating: “WATER FROM SINKS WILL 
BE USED FOR WASHING ONLY.” 
4. The Boston Public Health Commission (BPHC) does not 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 12 of 21 
 
 
 
recommend that BPS screen children for lead. If a child is 
exposed to water containing elevated lead levels, the BPHC 
recommends that parents consult their child's medical 
provider to assess whether their child's individual risk 
warrants blood lead testing. Many healthcare providers, 
such as MassHealth, cover the cost of lead testing. Families 
with questions or concerns about costs may contact BPS 
Health Services at 617-635-6788. 
Activation Protocol 
1. Upon completion of any water unit’s remediation action 
(e.g., replacement, repair, etc.), Facilities Management 
Environmental Division will flush each water unit for 
approximately 20 minutes or more as needed to remove any 
visual signs of sediment, debris, and rust. BPS will adhere to 
a minimum flushing time of 20 minutes for activation of 
offline water units. 
2. Eight to eighteen (8-18) hours post flushing, a sample from 
each water unit will be collected for confirmatory analysis of 
lead and copper.  
3. Repeat step #2 two additional times to conclude three (3) 
rounds of testing. For the initial activation of a filtered water 
unit, a sample for coliform will be collected during one of 
the three rounds of testing (see New England States’ 
Sample Collection & Preservation Guidance Manual For 
Drinking Water, p. 36, New England States' Sample 
Collection & Preservation Guidance Manual for Drinking 
Water, Revision 5.0, January 2015).  
4. Upon receiving three (3) consecutive sets of sample results 
at the lowest possible concentrations and one negative fecal 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 13 of 21 
 
 
 
bacteria test per filtered water unit, BPS Communications 
and Facilities Management will immediately implement the 
Activation Communications Protocol (pg. 18). 
5. Facilities Management and the head of school/principal will 
select a date for activating the water unit(s) to go online. 
6. Once a date has been selected, the Facilities Management 
Plumbing Division will work on logistics for turning the 
water unit(s) online. Logistics will include an activation flush. 
Flushing Protocol 
1. Food services equipment and fixtures (i.e., food preparation 
sink faucets, kettles, tilt skillets, ice makers, etc.) shall be 
flushed every morning for two (2) minutes prior to the 
preparation of any food by the food service manager or 
designated food services employee. Only cold water shall be 
used for the flush and for the preparation of any food and or 
beverage. The food services manager will be responsible for 
keeping a daily log of all flushing activities.  
2. When drinking from an online fountain, it is recommended 
that the drinker first let the water run for 5-10 seconds 
before drinking. This will be communicated to the BPS 
community through the Implementation Protocols: 
Education and Training (pg. 20).  
3. Following an extended school vacation (e.g., summer 
vacation, February vacation), custodians will flush all online 
fountains prior to the restart of school. 
4. Before watering a school garden with tap water, all 
gardeners must first flush the water for 2 minutes.  


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 14 of 21 
 
 
 
Filter and Filtered Water Fountain Standard Operating 
Procedure and Maintenance Protocol 
In addition to the Annual Testing Protocol (pg. 8), BPS will collect 
samples for coliform testing of filtered online water units.  
In cases where coliform is present within filtered online water 
units: 
1. Upon notification from the BPS Sustainability and 
Environmental Resources Manager, BPS Facilities 
Management Plumbing Division will immediately deactivate 
only the impacted online water unit(s), unless otherwise 
specifically directed.  These units will be made offline and 
tagged “Water Shut Off. Do NOT turn on without Facilities 
Management or FNS (Food and Nutrition Services) 
Approval.”   
2. BPS Facilities Management will provide bottled water, 
bottled water units, and cups. One bottled water cooler will 
be provided for each deactivated water unit (e.g. water 
fountain) or as necessary to meet 248 CMR 10.00: Uniform 
State Plumbing  Code requirements (See: Table 1: Minimum 
Facilities For Building Occupancy, available at the following 
link: 248 CMR 10.00: Uniform state plumbing code).  
3. BPS Communications and BPS Facilities Management will 
immediately implement the Deactivation Communications 
Protocol (pg. 18). 
4. BPS Facilities Management Environmental and Plumbing 
Divisions will inspect the impacted water unit and schedule 
remediation action(s) (e.g., replacement of the filter). 
5. The impacted water unit will remain deactivated until 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 15 of 21 
 
 
 
remediation actions have been completed and BPS 
Facilities Management Environmental Division has received 
one (1) sample result absent of coliform per affected water 
unit.  
BPS Facilities Management will initiate and uphold a vendor 
contract to replace and maintain water fountain filters once per 
year or more as needed.  
Daily Use/Maintenance 
• Only water should be put down the drains. Anything else 
can cause clogging and lead to permanent damage of the 
unit and plumbing. 
• Custodians are responsible for wiping down the units daily. 
The units shall be cleaned using the procedures outlined for 
all high touch surfaces using food grade cleaning products. 
 
Filter Status Indicator Light 
• When the light turns yellow, the school should put in a work 
order via Asset Essentials, and select “Filter Replacement”.  
• The yellow light is just an indicator that the filter is 
approaching the end of its life and will need to be changed 
soon. The light does not indicate that the filter or water 
quality is compromised.  
• If a light turns red, please place one of the signs provided in 
your Drinking Water Binder on the unit and encourage 
occupants to utilize another unit until the filter can be 
replaced. 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 16 of 21 
 
 
 
Leaking/broken Unit 
• If the unit has been newly installed within the last year, the 
school should reach out to Audrey Ng, the Water & 
Sustainability Project Manager to have the contractor 
address the issue under warranty.  
• If the unit is not newly installed, the school should put in a 
work order via Asset Essentials to be addressed by your 
plumbing supervisor. 
• The school’s operations staff may choose to use the tools 
provided in the Water Bottle Refill Station Repair Kit to open 
and turn off the unit to stop the leaking until the contractor 
arrives. 
Bottled Water Protocol 
• BPS Facilities Management will provide bottled water, 
bottled water coolers, and cups for all offline schools, and for 
any medical or food service areas that lack access to tap 
water units in any online schools.  
• BPS Facilities Management will cease bottled water 
accounts for schools that are activated online. Bottled water 
coolers will only remain in an online school in medical or 
food service areas if those areas lack access to tap water 
units. 
• BPS Facilities Management will manage and track all 
bottled water accounts. 
• Heads of school/principals will develop a school-based plan 
for ensuring bottled water and cups are available 
continuously, without disruption, on all water coolers 
throughout the entire school day, including during meal 
times. Schools are responsible for calling Facilities 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 17 of 21 
 
 
 
Management to order water and cups, if running low before 
the existing, regular water delivery schedule. 
IMPLEMENTATION PROTOCOLS: COMMUNICATIONS & 
REPORTING 
BPS Communications is responsible for updating and 
maintaining the BPS water website at BPS Water / Boston School 
Water Quality with content support from BPS Facilities 
Management and BPS Department of Health and Wellness. BPS 
Communications will update the BPS water website to include a 
current list of online schools and the most recent annual test 
results, and a current list of offline schools. These lists must be 
updated every time a school is activated or deactivated. 
Deactivation Communications Protocol 
In cases where coliform is present or concentrations of lead and 
or copper in water units used for drinking or food preparation 
exceed the lead/copper action levels, BPS Communications and 
Facilities Management will promptly implement the Deactivation 
Communications Protocol: 
1. The school’s principal/head of school will be notified of the 
deactivation protocol and test results by email with the test 
results and a standardized letter for the school community. 
2. The letter will include the water testing results and a link to 
the BPS water website, which provides resources related to 
lead in the water. A letter template will be provided by BPS 
Communications and BPS Facilities Management, and the 
testing results will be provided by BPS Facilities 
Management. 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 18 of 21 
 
 
 
3. Any media statements will be managed by BPS 
Communications. 
Activation Communications Protocol 
Upon receiving three (3) consecutive sets of sample results below 
lead and copper action levels, and one negative fecal bacteria 
test result for filtered water units, BPS Communications and 
Facilities Management will immediately implement the 
Activation Communications Protocol: 
1. The school’s principal/head of school will be notified of the 
activation protocol and test results. 
2. The letter will include the water testing results, a link to the 
BPS water website, and details regarding any water 
infrastructure improvements (e.g., new fountains, filters, 
pipes). A letter template will be provided by BPS 
Communications and BPS Facilities Management, and the 
test results will be provided by BPS Facilities Management. 
The principal/head of school will share this information with 
the school community. 
3. BPS Facilities Management and the principal/head of school 
will select a date for activating the water unit(s) online. 
4. Once a date has been selected, BPS Facilities Management 
Plumbing Division will implement the logistics for turning 
the water unit(s) online. 
ANNUAL REPORTING 
BPS Facilities Management will provide water testing results and 
any recent water-related information to BPS Communications for 
the BPS water webpage and annual notices to the BPS 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 19 of 21 
 
 
 
community.  
BPS Department of Health and Wellness and BPS Facilities 
Management will provide annual updates to the “BPS Drinking 
Water Access Policy”, if needed. 
BPS Department of Health and Wellness and BPS Facilities 
Management will annually report on the implementation of the 
Water Policy to the District Wellness Council and subsequently 
the BPS School Committee. Following BPS School Committee 
review, this information will be shared with MassDEP. 
 
IMPLEMENTATION PROTOCOLS: EDUCATION & TRAINING 
The following BPS staff will receive annual training and 
professional development about this policy and its protocols: 
• Principals/heads of school will receive training at the Annual 
Leadership Institute as a part of Operations and/or wellness-
related sessions. 
• Food service managers and staff will receive training at the 
summer training provided by Food and Nutrition Services. 
• Custodians will receive training at summer training 
provided by BPS Facilities Management. 
• School-based staff will be trained by principals/heads of 
school at the beginning of the school year, as part of the 
school policies and procedures overview. 
• Any new Facilities Management Environmental and 
Plumbing Division staff will receive training as part of their 
onboarding process.  
BPS Department of Health and Wellness will educate, promote, 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 20 of 21 
 
 
 
and communicate the importance and benefits of drinking 
water, and collaborate with Facilities Management and Food and 
Nutrition Services to communicate all aspects of this policy to 
school leaders, staff, students, and school community. 
BPS School Wellness Councils will include water-policy related 
goals as part of their annual Wellness Action Plans. 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-20 
Page 21 of 21 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Sustainability, Energy, and Environment 
Program Director 
Department: 
Facilities Management  
Mailing Address: 1216 Dorchester Avenue, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9576 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Owner: 
Senior Environmental Supervisor 
Department: 
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 1216 Dorchester Avenue, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-8300 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director 
Department: 
Health & Wellness 
Mailing Address: 370 Columbia Road, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-1631 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


