Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular  
NUMBER: 
FMT-09 
Version 01 
 
 
 
MATERIAL DISTRIBUTION PROCEDURES  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
INDIVIDUAL OR SPECIAL PURCHASE ORDERS FOR DELIVERY TO 
THE MATERIAL DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Individual or special orders are delivered to users as requested by 
department heads. Copies of the purchase order must be 
forwarded to the Distribution Center before the material arrives 
or it may be refused; if accepted, it may be confused with other 
individual orders and sent to the wrong department. Freight 
carriers are required to schedule their deliveries with the 
Distribution Center. Failure to notify the Distribution Center 
before making a delivery may result in your order being refused, 
especially during the period between August 1 and November 15 
when storage space is at a minimum. All orders shipped to the 
Distribution Center should have an “Attention To:” block which 
indicates a person or department to which the material is being 
shipped; this is very important. You can stipulate an “Attention 
To:” address on your original requisition entered on PeopleSoft.  
CUSTODIAL ORDERS  
Custodial requisitions are submitted on two forms developed by 
Distribution and the Facilities Management Department. The first 
form is an annual order form which lists all custodial items 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-09  
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
 
authorized for delivery to schools. This form is delivered to each 
school on an annual basis in June/July. The second form is a bi-
monthly (every 2 months) “short” form which is delivered to 
schools each bi-monthly except those months when the large 
annual form is used. Custodians are required to complete these 
forms and return them to the Distribution Center. All forms 
should be emailed to  warehouse@bostonpublicschools.org or 
faxed to the Distribution Center at 617-635-8581. All orders which 
are not a part of regular bi-monthly cycles must be submitted 
and approved by Facilities Department custodial area managers.  
REQUIRED DATA 
Department head signatures, shipping location, and “Attention 
To” are required on all requests; if any of these items are missing, 
your requests could be delayed or may ship to the wrong 
department.  
Please call the Distribution Center at 617-635-8745 if you have 
special requirements or problems, or fax us at 617-635-8581, or 
email warehouse@bostonpublicschools.org. 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FMT-09  
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
 
Owner: 
Executive Director of Facilities 
Department: 
Facilities Management  
Mailing Address: 
1216 Dorchester Avenue, Dorchester, MA 
02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9170 
Fax: 
617-635-9252 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


