Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FNS-02 
Version 01 
 
1 
EMERGENCY MEAL PROCEDURES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 In the event of an unforeseen emergency, school staff must 
adhere to the following procedures to ensure meals are made 
available to students in a safe and timely manner. “Emergency” is 
defined as equipment breakdown, weather, facility issues, etc. or 
a situation that prevents staff from serving safe meals during the 
allotted mealtimes scheduled. The procedures are: 
1. Principal or custodian should inform onsite food service 
personnel that there is an emergency preventing the service 
of meals and approximately how long the emergency will 
last. Often this is difficult to assess. However, if the 
emergency is anticipated to be longer than 60 to 90 
minutes after the start of the school day, alternative meal 
service plans need to be made to ensure students receive 
meals in a safe and timely manner.  
2. The Food and Nutrition Services Department should be 
informed immediately. The phone number is 617-635-9144. 
The onsite Food Services Staff should also contact their 
respective field coordinator.  
3. Once the Food and Nutrition Services Department is 
notified about the emergency, a contingency plan that 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-02 
Page 2 of 9 
 
includes an alternate menu, mealtimes, or location will be 
jointly decided upon. A substitute emergency meal (shelf-
stable) which meets regulations may be provided if the 
emergency prevents access to the kitchen.  
4. If there is an emergency just before lunch, the onsite Food 
Services staff should be notified immediately. If needed, 
appropriate arrangements will be made to ensure students 
are fed quickly and efficiently. Food and Nutrition Services 
may need to provide an alternative meal, depending on the 
emergency. Delays may be expected. All staff should be 
flexible and patient.  
5. When and if the administration makes the decision to send 
the student body to another school or alternative location, 
the Food and Nutrition Services Department needs to be 
notified immediately to ensure food is available at the new 
location.  
6. This plan of action is dependent on cooperation from 
everyone.  
7. During a declared state of emergency, the attached 
instructions will be followed to issue USDA commodities. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-02 
Page 3 of 9 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Deputy Director 
Department: 
Food and Nutrition Services 
Mailing Address: 
370 Columbia Road, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9158 
Fax: 
617-635-9304 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-02 
Page 4 of 9 
 
MASSACHUSETTS PLAN FOR UTILIZATION OF USDA DONATED 
FOODS FOR DISASTER RELIEF 
1. Purpose: The purpose of this plan is to establish the 
procedure for obtaining the United States Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) donated commodities in Massachusetts 
during a presidential disaster.  
2. Background: The Secretary of Agriculture is responsible for 
ensuring that adequate stocks of food are available for 
group feeding or household distribution in any area 
suffering from a major disaster or emergency. During a 
disaster, food that has been purchased by the USDA for use 
in the state's food programs is made available to disaster 
organizations in that state. Food that is stored in school or 
state warehouses can be used immediately. The USDA will 
replace this food.  
3. General:  
• USDA donated foods will not be distributed to 
individual families except when the Secretary of 
Agriculture determines that the commercial channels 
of trade have been disrupted because of the 
emergency caused by a disaster.  
• In Massachusetts, USDA foods (which become the 
property of the Commonwealth) are distributed by the 
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and 
Secondary Education, Nutrition Programs and Services, 
75 Pleasant Street, Malden, MA 02148-4906.  
• Contact should be made with the local authorities to 
establish a plan to procure these items. All foods are 
free of charge to the Red Cross. There may be a small 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-02 
Page 5 of 9 
 
service charge for handling.  
• Food items are also stored in bulk in four warehouses 
throughout the Commonwealth. In the event sufficient 
foods are not available in the schools, they may be 
requested by the school lunch personnel through their 
channels or through the American Red Cross Mass Bay 
Chapter office.  
• Transportation needed to move the food to the disaster 
area is not available from the Department of 
Elementary and Secondary Education. It is 
recommended that chapters develop local 
contingency plans. The key to prompt and efficient 
transportation of these foods is prior planning by the 
chapter.  
• Food will be released when the President has declared 
a disaster area, or when the Commonwealth has 
requested a declaration. They will also be released 
upon request of Red Cross or governmental authorities 
when a disaster appears to be imminent, people being 
evacuated, or mass feeding is needed for a substantial 
number of dislocated families and individuals.  
4. Procedure for obtaining USDA donated foods for Red Cross 
mass feeding:  
• When the feeding is being done by school lunch 
personnel:  
o They will make food available from their supply.  
o When additional foods are required, they will 
request them. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-02 
Page 6 of 9 
 
• When the feeding is being done by other than school 
lunch personnel, the Red Cross will make its request 
through the Mass Bay office of the Red Cross. It will 
include a synopsis of the disaster situation and the 
estimated amounts and kinds of food commodities 
required.  
• The nearest warehouse or other facility will be 
instructed to release the food.  
• The Red Cross will dispatch the necessary 
transportation to pick up the foods.  
• In all instances, temporary receipts will be signed, 
followed by more formal procedures.  
5. Procedures for returning used foods:  
• If a large amount of food is to be returned, the 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education 
will send an agent to the Red Cross to arrange the 
details of the return. If only a small amount is to be 
returned, the Red Cross will be instructed to turn it 
over to the designated school in the area. In either 
case, the Red Cross should obtain and file a receipt for 
the returned food.  
6. Procedure for reporting on USDA donated foods: 
• After mass feeding is completed, the Red Cross will be 
advised on the information necessary to enable the 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education 
to report on commodities distributed for disaster relief, 
including certification that all food products were used 
in accordance with existing regulations and used for 
mass feeding.  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-02 
Page 7 of 9 
 
• The program for use of USDA donated foods in the 
disaster will be considered completed when all unused 
food has been returned and the above report has been 
submitted.  
American Red Cross:  
Liberty Black 
Director of Disaster Services 
Mass. DESE: 
Robert M. Leshin 
Director, Office for Food and Nutrition Programs 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-02 
Page 8 of 9 
 
MASSACHUSETTS DEPARTMENT OF ELEMENTARY AND 
SECONDARY EDUCATION 
75 Pleasant Street, Malden, Massachusetts 02148-4906 
 
Telephone: (781) 338-3000 
TTY: N.E.T. Relay 1-800-439-2370 
MEMORANDUM 
To: 
All School and Child and Adult Care Food Program 
Sponsors 
From: 
 Kathleen C. Millett  
Former Executive Director, Office for Nutrition, Health 
and Safety Programs 
Date: 
 January 26, 2015  
Subject: Procedures for Using USDA Foods During an 
Emergency 
In the case where a school or childcare setting is officially 
designated as an emergency shelter, USDA Foods may be 
replaced. This memorandum serves to identify the process to use 
the USDA Foods and request replacement. After approval from 
this office, USDA donated foods will be made available to the 
American Red Cross or public schools for feeding in a congregate 
setting. The following steps are to be used to receive food 
assistance for food services during an emergency declaration. 
First, contact Marion Browning of the food distribution section at 
mbrowning@doe.mass.edu or 781-338-6460, email is preferred, 
with your immediate food needs, along with the estimated 
number of meals to be served. If you are unable to reach Ms. 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-02 
Page 9 of 9 
 
Browning, please email me at kmillett@doe.mass.edu or 781-338-
6479. Include the following information to the extent possible: 
• Description of major disaster or emergency situation. 
• Number of people requiring meals and congregate meal 
service period. 
• Quantity and types of food needed for congregate meal 
service. 
• Number and location of sites providing congregate meal 
service. 
Once the request for donated foods is approved, you may use any 
USDA donated foods available at your school. After the crisis has 
passed, please report the following information to the 
commodity distribution section: 
• Amount of USDA commodities actually utilized. 
• Number of days of the meal service and number of meals 
actually served (i.e., 2,000 persons, three meals per day for 
five days). 
We will make every effort to replace the value of USDA donated 
foods used with inventory from our warehouse. 


