Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FNS-03 
Version 01 
 
FOOD AND NUTRITION POLICY ON COMPETITIVE FOOD 
AND BEVERAGES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
These guidelines will cover food and beverages that are sold, 
provided, or served to students within school buildings or on 
school grounds, in the student stores, cafeterias, classrooms, 
hallways, and vending machines, all of which are sold outside of 
(i.e., in competition with) the federally funded School Meal 
Program. These guidelines also apply to fundraisers, classroom 
activities, and school events. This includes food and beverages 
supplied by schools during official transportation to and from 
school and district-sponsored activities, including but not limited 
to field trips and interscholastic sporting events where the school 
is the visiting team. See the Implementation Guidelines section 
for details. 
INTRODUCTION  
In response to continuing concerns regarding childhood 
overweight and obesity as well as other diet-related diseases in 
our city’s school-aged children, the Boston School Committee 
has approved the following policy language regarding beverages 
and food in schools.   


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 2 of 21 
 
These guidelines were first adopted on July 1, 2004, and were 
implemented with the start of school in September 2004. They 
were updated in April 2011 and June 2015 to take into 
consideration new federal and state nutrition guidelines that 
impact the overall health and wellness of our students and staff,  
specifically the Healthy Hunger-Free Kids Act, 2010. Most recently, 
they were updated in August 2017 to reflect changes in the 
District Wellness Policy. This document is intended to assist 
school administrators in implementing these guidelines in their 
schools.  
All such competitive foods shall meet the criteria outlined in the 
implementation guidelines that follow. This includes food and 
beverages sold, provided, or served to students in:  
● School cafeterias, specifically “a la carte” entrees and 
snacks 
● Vending machines  
● School stores  
● School snack bars  
● Concession stands  
● Classrooms and hallways  
● Booster sales  
● Fundraising activities  
● School-sponsored or school-related events, including 
those with school-sponsored transportation occurring off 
school grounds, such as sporting events and field days  
● Food trucks on school grounds  
 
These guidelines apply to entrees, snacks, side items, and 
desserts offered or sold outside of the school meals program. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 3 of 21 
 
Items that would be considered entrées if sold in the 
reimbursable meal program, but are sold a la carte as 
Competitive Foods, are not subject to these guidelines. This 
policy will be reviewed once yearly by a sub-committee of the 
Boston Public Schools (BPS) District Wellness Council. 
BACKGROUND  
Schools across the city, state, and nation have been grappling 
with developing meaningful and applicable guidelines on this 
issue of obesity for the past decade. Earlier “Competitive Food 
Guidelines,” set forth by USDA and individual state departments 
of education, prohibited only the sale of foods of minimal 
nutritional value (Federal Register: 7 CFR Part 210.11). These 
standards attempted to address types of foods and beverages 
sold, provided, or served to students within school buildings. 
While some state standards may have been useful thirty years 
ago, most are outdated, as they do not address the growing 
availability of vending machines, foods, candy, and soda sold 
inside and outside of the cafeteria at fundraisers or in student 
stores. Competitive foods are relatively low in nutrient density 
and high in fat, added sugar, and calories. Neither a la carte nor 
competitive foods are bound by dietary guidelines that the 
National School Lunch (NSLP), National School Breakfast, and 
After School Snack Programs must adhere to.  
National and state departments of education, school boards, food 
policy advocacy organizations, the American Academy of 
Pediatrics, the Center for Science in the Public Interest, state 
dietetic and school food service associations, and other 
representative groups have met over the past several years to 
establish or recommend nutrition standards to promote healthy 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 4 of 21 
 
eating habits among children. Massachusetts A La Carte Food 
Standards to Promote a Healthier School Environment is a 
guideline that has been established by the Massachusetts Action 
for Healthy Kids, first adopted in January 2004 and updated in 
December 2009. These guidelines, along with the Institute of 
Medicine, the Alliance for a Healthier Generation Competitive 
Foods and School Beverage Guidelines, nutrition standards from 
the School Nutrition Bill (H4459, S2322), and the HealthierUS 
School Challenge informed the latest revision to our policy. In 
accordance with Mayor Menino’s Executive Order Relative to 
Healthy Beverage Options1, all beverages sold on school grounds 
shall meet the city’s Healthy Options Beverage Standards.  
POLICY  
The Boston Public Schools supports lifelong healthy eating habits 
for all students and staff and is committed to addressing the 
increasing rates of diet-related health consequences among 
these groups by creating a healthy school food environment. 
Serving healthy choices in the lunchroom, limiting availability 
and marketing of unhealthy foods and sugary drinks, and making 
water available to students throughout the day are some of the 
ways to create a healthy school food environment. BPS is 
committed to ensuring food sold or served outside of the 
cafeteria meets high nutritional standards.   
BPS believes the cafeteria is an essential setting to educate and 
promote healthy eating habits. BPS is committed to serving 
students nutritious and delicious food that is less processed, 
more locally sourced, and culturally responsive to reflect the 
diverse student population. As an effective way to improve the 
nutritional quality of foods served in schools and consumed by 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 5 of 21 
 
students, the district created and implemented menu and 
ingredient guidelines exceeding federal requirements. BPS will 
continue a constant review of school food and the food 
environment to ensure safety, quality, menu equity, and 
innovation. The district will be an innovator with school food, 
serving foods that are new and exciting for the students. We 
believe that students deserve meals reflective of their culture and 
tastes. We believe eating well is not a privilege; it is a right.   
Key requirements of creating a healthy school food environment 
are:  
School Meals Program  
● Ensure all menus meet USDA-mandated requirements, as 
well as Massachusetts Department of Public Health 
regulations and the latest scientific evidence on healthy 
eating practices. At a minimum, schools must follow 
Bronze status standards for the Alliance for a Healthier 
Generation2, and work toward Bronze status standards 
for the HealthierUS School Challenge3.  
● Ensure all menus offer variety and are well presented in 
an appealing way, and meals and menu items are labeled 
to communicate deliciousness, as well as specific 
ingredients.  
● Encourage students to participate in breakfast, lunch, and 
afterschool meals programs and avoid stigmatizing 
children who participate.  
● Provide food with “clean” labels that are free of unwanted 
ingredients, including trans fats, high fructose corn syrup, 
artificial colors, artificial sweeteners, additives 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 6 of 21 
 
(azodicarbonamide, bromated flour), and artificial 
preservatives (nitrates, nitrites, sulfates, sulfites, MSG, 
BHA, BHT, TBHQ). 
● Reduce material used for packaging, sourcing recyclable 
or compostable materials when possible, and working to 
promote best practices around recycling and 
composting.  
● Make water available at no cost during mealtimes 
wherever meals are served.  
Food Safety   
● Ensure kitchen facilities (both prep and satellite locations) 
are inspected twice a year by the Inspectional Services 
Division (ISD - Health Department).  
● Implement a stringent and detailed internal Hazard 
Analysis and Control Points (HACCP) plan that provides 
regulations in following safety procedures for food recalls, 
emergency preparedness to avoid foodborne illnesses, 
and the spread of infectious diseases.  
● Ensure all employees who work 5+ hours are  Food Safety.  
● Ensure all lead employees are allergy awareness certified 
and have American Heart Association HeartSaver First Aid 
Program 2-year certification.   
Nutrition Education, Promotion and Food & Beverage Marketing  
● Promote health and nutrition messages that encourage 
the consumption of fruits and vegetables, whole grains, 
healthy fats, low-fat dairy products, and water; and other 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 7 of 21 
 
messages consistent with research-based findings that 
indicate a positive impact on health.  
● Identify opportunities to teach healthy eating habits in 
health education, physical education, and other subjects, 
and through cafeteria and other school-wide promotions.  
● Identify opportunities to support teachers, school staff, 
and parents around modeling healthy eating habits and 
following appropriate nutritional standards at school 
celebrations and staff meetings. 
● Only allow food and beverage marketing on school 
grounds, including items shared with students, that 
promote foods and/or beverages that meet the BPS 
nutritional standards.  
Competitive Food & Beverages  
● Follow federal, state, and local laws and Forbid the sale of 
food and beverages by anyone other than the Food and 
Nutrition Services Department, which is solely responsible 
for food and beverages sold to children during the school 
day. regulations for competitive foods and beverages (i.e., 
foods sold, provided, or served within school buildings or 
on school grounds outside of the school meals program) 
in all schools, as outlined in this circular.  
● Prohibit food sold in competition with school meals, 
including food-based fundraisers and vending machines 
during the school day.  
● Encourage non-food alternatives for school fundraisers, 
school parties, and classroom celebrations.  


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 8 of 21 
 
● Prohibit the use of food and beverage as a reward or 
means of discipline.  
All BPS schools shall follow Food and Nutrition Services policies 
and circulars.   
IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES 
Competitive Food and Beverages  
Regulations on competitive food sales in schools and vending 
machines are contained in regulations established by the 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 9 of 21 
 
Massachusetts Board of Education. Failure to follow these 
regulations may result in loss of federal funding.1,2,3,4,5,6,7  
The Food and Nutrition Services Department is solely responsible 
for food and beverages sold to children during the school day; 
 
1 Regulatory Authority M.G.L. C.15, § 1G 
2 Federal Register, 2013, 7 CFR Parts 210 and 220, National School 
Lunch Program and School Breakfast Program: Nutrition 
Standards for All Foods Sold in Schools as Required by the 
Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010; Interim Final Rule, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, 78 (125) (June 28, 2013). 
3 Federal Register, 2014, 7 CFR Parts 210 and 220, Local School 
Wellness Policy Implementation under the Healthy, Hunger-Free 
Kids Act of 2010: Proposed Rule, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
79 (38) (February 26, 2014). 
4 Massachusetts General Laws (2010). Chapter 111, Section 223, 
5 State of Massachusetts, Chapter 96 of the Acts of 2012 
(amendment to 2010 law),. 
6 Massachusetts Department of Public Health (2010), Nutrition 
Standards for Competitive Foods and Beverages in Public 
Schools, 105 CMR 225.000 
7 Massachusetts Department of Public Health (2012). “Students, 
Healthy Schools: Revised Guidance for Implementing the 
Massachusetts School Nutrition Standards for Competitive Foods 
and Beverages” 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 10 of 21 
 
consequently, the sale of food and beverages by others is 
expressly forbidden.  
The income for the total food and beverage service regularly 
maintained on school premises shall accrue to the school food 
services program to be used solely for the operation or 
improvement of such service. This shall include the income from 
the sale of a la carte foods and beverages. Food sales operated for 
profit (this includes bake and candy sales) shall not operate 
during the regular school day. 
The sale of a la carte foods shall be restricted to those items 
recognized as contributing to or permitted to be served as part of 
the breakfast or lunch. This restriction automatically eliminates 
the sale of candy, carbonated beverages, etc. Fundraising 
activities can only operate after school hours. 
Canteen Services at School Site Locations 
7 CFR 210, 220 Competitive Foods: Federal regulations prevent 
the sale of candy, gum, and carbonated beverages to students on 
school premises from the beginning of the school day to the end 
of the last lunch period.  
The sale of food items from canteen trucks (with the exception of 
an open campus), school stores, or other areas that compete with 
school meals, time, and money is in violation of federal 
regulations. These sales further divert income essential to the 
financial well-being of the Food and Nutrition Services program. 
Use of canteen services on school premises by students should 
be prohibited. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 11 of 21 
 
Preparation of all competitive foods and beverages must meet 
state and federal food safety guidelines.  
In accordance with 105 CMR 225.100, nutrition information must 
be made available to students for non-prepackaged competitive 
foods and beverages as of August 1, 2013. This requirement shall 
not apply to the sale or provision of fresh fruits or fresh 
vegetables, and foods or beverages sold during the school day at 
booster sales, concession stands and other school-sponsored or 
school-related fundraisers and events.   
No competitive food and beverages shall be sold, served, or 
provided during school mealtimes.  
Implementation guidelines must comply with or exceed nutrition 
standards delineated by 105 CMR 225.000: Nutrition Standards 
for Competitive Foods and Beverages in Public Schools. 
All foods sold, served, or provided at schools should meet the 
guidelines given in FNS-06. 
Beverages  
The total beverage product line must meet the following criteria:  
● Schools may sell, provide, or serve only plain water and 
juice. All milk is unflavored. No flavored milk will be 
offered to students. Beverages such as soft drinks, fruit 
drinks with the minimal nutritional value, and sports 
drinks cannot be sold, provided, or served to students 
anywhere in school buildings or on the school campus.  
● Plain drinking water must be readily available during the 
school day at no cost. 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 12 of 21 
 
● Drinking water must be caffeine-free, have 0 mg of 
sodium, and have no nutritive or non-nutritive 
sweeteners. Natural flavorings and carbonation are 
acceptable.  
● Beverages shall not contain added sugars, including high 
fructose corn syrup and non-nutritive sweeteners.  
● No beverages shall contain artificial sweeteners.  
● Competitive juice beverages will not be offered in 
elementary schools (i.e., grades PreK-5). Fruit and/or 
vegetable based drinks sold in middle and high schools 
(i.e., grades 6-12) must be composed of no less than 100% 
fruit/vegetable juices with no added sweeteners, not to 
exceed 4 ounces in middle schools (i.e. grades 6-8), and 
not to exceed 8 ounces in high school (i.e., grades 9-12),  
with 120 calories/8 oz. plus 10% Daily Value of 3 vitamins 
and nutrients, such as Vitamin A, C, D and calcium  
● All milk and milk substitute products shall be pasteurized 
fluid types of low fat (1%) or skim (fat free) milk which 
meet USDA, state, and local standards for milk. All milk 
shall contain Vitamins A and D at levels specified by the 
Food and Drug Administration and shall be consistent 
with the state and local standards for such milk. All milk, 
flavored milk, and milk substitute container sizes shall not 
exceed 8 ounces.  
● Soy, rice, and other milk-substitute drinks shall be 
calcium and vitamin-fortified and shall contain no more 
than 22 grams total sugars per 8 ounces.  
● No beverages shall contain more than trace amounts of 
caffeine.  


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 13 of 21 
 
● City of Boston agencies in BPS buildings may offer 8 oz. of 
100% juice or low-fat and nonfat milk products in vending 
machines available only outside of the school day.  
Foods  
Fresh fruits and/or non-fried vegetables must be offered 
wherever competitive foods are sold, provided, or served to 
students except in non-refrigerated vending machines and 
vending machines offering only beverages. Use of fryolators in 
preparing competitive foods is prohibited.  
In addition, competitive foods must meet the following 
nutritional criteria per item:  
• Any other food that meets all the following criteria:  
a. ≤ 35% of total calories from fat.  
i. Nuts, nut butters, and seeds are exempt from 
above limitation and are permitted if served in 1 oz 
portions.  
ii. Fruit and nut combination products are exempt 
from the above limitation.  
iii. If products are dairy, they must be non-fat or low 
fat dairy.  
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 14 of 21 
 
b. ≤ 10% of calories from saturated fat OR ≤1g saturated 
fat  
i. Nuts, nut butters, and seeds are exempt from 
above limitation and are permitted if served in 1 oz 
portions.  
c. 0g trans fat  
d. ≤ 35% of weight from total sugars in foods  
i. Non-fat or low-fat yogurt with a maximum of 30g 
sugar per 8 ounces.  
e. ≤ 200 mg sodium  
i. A la carte entrees like cheese sandwiches, 
vegetables with sauce, and soups must be less 
than 480 mg sodium if they contain one or more 
of the following: 
1. ≥2g fiber  
2. ≥5g protein  
3. ≥10% DV of Vitamin A, C, E, folate, calcium, 
magnesium, potassium, or iron  
f. Meet 1 of the following calorie requirements:  
i. 
≤100 calories  
ii. 
Vegetables with sauce and soups can have 150 
calories if they contain two or more of the 
following: ≥2g fiber; or ≥5g protein; or ≥10% DV of 
Vitamin A, C, E, folate, calcium, magnesium, 
potassium, or iron; or ≥½ serving (¼ cup) of fruit 
or vegetables.  
iii. 
Other foods can have calorie limits per below if 
they contain one or more of the following:  


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 15 of 21 
 
1. ≥ 2g fiber  
2. ≥ 5g protein  
3. ≥ 10% DV of Vitamin A, C, E, folate, calcium, 
magnesium, potassium, or iron  
4. ≥ ½ serving (1/4 cup) of fruit or vegetables:  
a. 
≤ 150 calories for elementary schools  
b. 
≤ 180 calories for middle and  
c. 
≤ 200 calories for high schools 
• Bread and other whole grain-based products shall have a 
whole grain (such as whole wheat) listed as the first 
ingredient or contain grains that are at least 51% whole 
grains.  
• No more than trace amounts of caffeine are allowed in 
foods.  
• Foods must contain no artificial sweeteners.  
• Foods must have limited added sweeteners as much as 
possible.  
• Fruits shall have no added sweeteners and have 0g total fat. 
Since fresh fruits and vegetables vary in size and calories 
naturally, they have no calorie limit.  
• Fruits packaged in their own juices or dried will not exceed 
the following calorie limits: 150 calories for elementary 
schools, 180 calories for middle schools and 200 calories for 
high schools.  
• Dried fruit and nut combination products (commonly 
known as trail mix) can be included within these guidelines 
if they meet the following standards:  
a. The items found in the combination product include 
only unsweetened dried fruit, nuts, and/or seeds.  


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 16 of 21 
 
b. The product contains no added sweeteners.  
c. The combination product is exempt from the ≤ 35% of 
total calories from fat requirement, but must meet all 
requirements around calories, saturated fat, trans fat, 
sodium, sugar, and positive nutrients.  
• Any one egg or equal amount of egg equivalent is allowable 
if it contains no added fat.  
• Any reduced-fat or part-skim cheese ≤1 oz. 
Time Of Day  
The guidelines apply to all food and beverages (outside the USDA 
School Meals and After School Snack Program) provided to 
students on school grounds during the regular and extended 
school day when events are primarily under the control of the 
school or third parties on behalf of the school.  
The extended school day is the time before or after the official 
school day that includes activities such as clubs, yearbook, band 
and choir practice, student government, drama, sports practices, 
intramural sports, and childcare/latchkey programs.   
Vending machines, including those controlled by other entities in 
BPS buildings and grounds, shall comply with these guidelines at 
all times. Automatic timers will be used to limit access to 
competitive foods and beverages in vending machines during 
the school day, including during school mealtimes.  
Fundraisers, Classroom Parties, Food Rewards, and Meetings  
All fundraisers must meet Boston Public Schools’ 
implementation guidelines for competitive food. No food-based 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 17 of 21 
 
fundraisers are permitted during school meals. The building 
administrator or designee is responsible for approving all 
fundraisers. Classroom parties must also comply with Boston 
Public School’s competitive food guidelines and notification of 
the cafeteria manager is requested to help the cafeteria plan 
appropriately. Principals and staff will promote a school 
environment supportive of healthy eating. Adults are encouraged 
to model healthy eating by serving nutritious food and beverages 
at school meetings and events.  
Teachers and staff should refrain from providing candy and 
snacks of minimal nutritional value as rewards for students and 
instead integrate practices of non-food rewards. Food and 
beverage cannot be used as a reward means of discipline.  
If schools participate in fundraising involving food and beverages, 
the fundraiser should support a healthy school environment and 
be free from solicitation of foods that do not meet the 
specifications of the Dietary Guidelines for Americans. 
Fundraisers should not include the sale of candy, beverages, and 
snacks that do not meet the Boston Public Schools’ 
implementation guidelines for competitive foods.  
 
Schools should develop communication and tools to provide to 
PTA and other groups who are conducting fundraising, 
celebrations, meetings, and rewards for the school so that non-
food activities are used.  
Allergies  
Schools should consider all students with food allergies and 
make appropriate plans and accommodations in any food-based 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 18 of 21 
 
fundraiser, celebration, and/or reward according to the guidance 
provided in Superintendent’s Circular SHS-11, which provides 
more information on student allergies.  
Support For Implementation  
This is a citywide initiative, with the Boston Public Schools taking 
the lead to implement healthy snack and beverage guidelines. 
The Mayor’s Office, the Boston Public Health Commission (BPHC), 
and the Boston Centers for Youth and Families (BCYF) are all in 
full support of these policies.  
To assist with this transition, Food and Nutrition Services will 
continue meeting with vendors and manufacturers to discuss 
product specifications that meet these guidelines. Language 
referencing new policies is included in the Request for Bids for 
beverages, dairy and ice cream, and snack food products.  
Vendors who are awarded single-year or multiple-year contracts 
must comply with the stated guidelines.  
With assistance from the School Wellness Council, students, 
teachers, parents, and administrators will be informed and 
educated about the new guidelines. Technical support will be 
provided to help schools and agency partners adjust to the 
revised standards, including providing resources on healthful 
forms of fundraising and meeting guidelines. The 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts passed a School Nutrition Bill 
(H4459, S2322). The BPS implementation guidelines have been 
revised to include state nutritional standards.  
MONITORING AND COMPLIANCE  
Schools will monitor compliance in the following ways:  


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 19 of 21 
 
● School wellness councils should assess and track their 
school’s compliance with this policy and include 
implementing goals on their Wellness Action Plan to 
ensure compliance with the policy.  
● All schools will biennially complete the School Health 
Profiles Surveys (Profiles), including questions on 
competitive foods and beverages. Individual school 
reports will be shared back with schools after completing 
Profiles, stating whether the school is complying with the 
policy. 
The principal and relevant operational leaders will be notified by 
FNS and the Office of Health & Wellness if a school is found to not 
be compliant. School administration, families, students, and 
Wellness Council will be provided information about the policy to 
engage and support monitoring, enforcement, and compliance.  
 
 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 20 of 21 
 
DEFINITIONS  
Food of Minimal Nutritional Value: Food that provides less than 
five percent of the Reference Daily Intakes (RDI) for each of eight 
specified nutrients per serving. 
A La Carte Foods: Sold typically in the cafeteria by the school 
food service department. They are separately and individually 
priced and are not usually part of the NSLP.  
Competitive Foods: Competitive foods or beverages means all 
foods or beverages sold or provided in public schools, other than 
non-sweetened carbonated water and those items sold or 
provided as part of federal nutrition programs such as the School 
Breakfast Program, School Lunch Program, and the Child and  
Adult Care including those offered in: School cafeterias; school 
stores; school snack bars; concession stands, booster sales, 
vending machines; fundraising activities; school-sponsored or 
school-related events; food trucks, and any other location in 
public schools.  
REFERENCES 
Alliance for a Healthier Generation Standards 
Healthier US School Challenge Standards 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular FNS-03 
Page 21 of 21 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
 
Owner:  
Deputy Director 
Department:  
Food and Nutrition Services 
Mailing Address:  370 Columbia Road, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone:  
617-635-9143 
Fax:  
617-635-9304 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Owner:  
Senior Executive Director 
Department:  
Office of Health and Wellness 
Mailing Address:  2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone:  
617-635-6643 
Fax:  
617-635-1502 
Email:  
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


