Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FSE-01 
Version 01 
 
 
 
SCHOOL SAFETY CONTINGENCY PLANS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Emergencies happen randomly in time and place, but they can be 
handled efficiently if you have an adequate school action plan and 
an informed staff.  A plan without a crisis is better than a crisis 
without a plan.  School administrators and staff routinely manage 
crises efficiently, and a well thought out plan will ensure guidance 
in a major emergency. 
Boston Public Schools is a NIMS (National Incident Management 
System) compliance district.  NIMS uses a core set of concepts, 
principals, procedures, processes, standards, and terminology that 
may all be integrated with school emergency management 
practices.  This in part means that we use straight language and 
not codes when emergencies happen.   
When developing safety plans, school administrators must 
consider mitigation/prevention, response and aftermath, and 
components which apply to all emergency preparedness. 
Prevention/mitigation 
strategies 
are 
delineated 
in 
related 
Superintendent’s Circulars.  Appropriate response will be detailed 
in your School Safety Contingency Plan.  Dealing with recovery will 
be addressed via Special Education and Student Services policies 
and procedures and support from other BPS departments. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 2 of 42 
 
 
It is essential that there be a consistent approach to school safety 
planning throughout the district.  This will ensure that each school 
implements standard procedures in the event of an incident.  A 
defined course of action will also complement the efforts of 
responding public safety agencies. 
The issue of school safety planning is regularly assessed.  Ongoing 
risk analyses are conducted, and lessons learned from actual and 
most probable school incidents are integrated with BPS safety 
protocols.  Although every possible contingency may not be 
identified in BPS School Safety contingency plan guidelines, your 
plan should serve as a multi-hazard approach for handling school 
incidents. 
It is the responsibility of each school administrative head to 
update, review with staff and submit their School Safety 
Contingency Plan no later than the last week of August each 
school year. 
The names of those schools which fail to comply with this directive 
are forwarded to the Superintendent’s Office for appropriate 
action.  
Your School Safety Contingency Plan is to be completed in the 
Google doc shared with the school principal/head of school. Please 
use the original doc to complete your plan. Do not copy and 
share. It will be automatically saved. You are allowed continuous 
access to maintain its currency.  It is also accessible to the 
Superintendent’s Office staff and other appropriate BPS central 
departments.  Boston public safety agencies — police, fire, EMS 
and BOEM — have access to these plans in an emergency. The 
Office of Emergency Management and Preparedness is available 
as a resource to assist principals/schools leaders, heads of school 
and other administrative heads with access information and 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 3 of 42 
 
 
technical advice in order to complete their plans.  
INSTRUCTIONS FOR UPDATING AND EDITING SCHOOL SAFETY 
CONTINGENCY PLANS AND FIRE SAFETY PLANS 
The following is information on how to access and edit your 
building’s School Safety Contingency Plan and the building’s Fire 
Safety Plan. The actual School Safety Contingency Plan for your 
building was shared with you by the Director of the Office of 
Emergency Management and Preparedness or Director of 
Technology in a Google Doc. Use this Google Doc for all changes 
and updates.  Please make all changes in the original doc. Do not 
save and make changes.   
► If you cannot locate your plan, please contact The Office of 
Emergency Management and Preparedness Operations-
Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org.  
 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
Last Week in August 
Deadline for completion and submission on Google 
Doc to The Director of the Office of Emergency 
Management and Preparedness of revised School 
Safety Contingency Plan and review same with 
staff for this school year.   
 
SECTION I: INTRODUCTION 
The Boston Public Schools continues efforts to simplify and 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 4 of 42 
 
 
standardize school safety plans throughout the system.  It is 
understood that each school has its own “safety personality” based 
on its construction design, location, number of staff, number and 
grade level of students, as well as many other characteristics.  
However, there are common elements, policies, and procedures 
for all schools to follow in the event of an incident/crisis. 
There are five phases of emergency management for school 
administrators to consider when developing safety plans:  
● Mitigation 
● Prevention 
● Preparedness  
● Response  
● Recovery 
Although special emphasis is placed on spectacular and unusual 
incidents by the media, there are many routine types of school 
related occurrences that can also be extremely disruptive to a 
school. 
School administrators are called upon to deal with these 
emergencies on a regular basis.  In every type of school incident, 
the first responders and decision makers are school-based staff. 
When the scope of an incident escalates beyond the resources 
available at the school, initial actions taken or not taken by those 
closest to the event can help or hinder those who will arrive later 
and assume responsibility for resolving the situation. 
The intent of these guidelines is to assist school administrators in 
creating an appropriate working plan that will direct them 
through a crisis and expedite the return of their school to its 
normal operation following that crisis. It is a multi-hazard 
approach to school incident management. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 5 of 42 
 
 
BPS guidelines are based on concepts utilized in an Incident 
Command System developed by public safety agencies across the 
nation.  The following is a brief overview of the Incident Command 
System. 
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 
ICS has been modified for our application on the school level to 
manage any incident/crisis within our capacity and maintain 
compatibility 
with 
supplementary 
public 
safety 
agency’s 
emergency plans. 
In managing any incident/crisis, the paramount objectives for all 
school staff are to: 
● Ensure safety of all occupants 
● Follow BPS Safety Plan, Safe Mode and/or Fire protocol 
● Stabilize and resolve the incident when possible 
● Provide support for responding public safety agencies (911 
and BPS Dispatch 617-635-8000) 
● Protect school property 
The Incident Command System (ICS) is based on a team concept, 
where each team member has specific responsibilities.  BPS will 
utilize an on-site team and an off-site team that will focus on 
securing the necessary support from internal departments and 
external agencies.  The information flow is illustrated on the next 
page. 
The on-site BPS Incident Control team (ICT) team model calls for 
the following positions: 
Site Incident Control Team  
● Site Incident Control manager (SICM) 
● Risk analyst 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 6 of 42 
 
 
● Safety coordinator 
● Building coordinator 
● Incident scribe 
The roles, responsibilities and required skills for a successful Site 
Incident Control Team follow: 
Site Incident Control Manager  
Generally, the site incident control manager (SICM) should be the 
head of school/principal/director, the individual who has ultimate 
responsibility for his/her school’s operation.  The SICM must have 
a clear understanding of the school system’s policies and 
procedures.  The SICM must also be able to make quality 
assessments, communicate well and command others.  These are 
normal functions for a school’s administrator to perform. 
Depending on the severity and tier level of the incident, the SICM 
will establish a command post at a designated location and 
activate the school’s internal team.  The nature of the incident 
determines the configuration of the team.  In a large-scale 
incident, the team can be expanded or collapsed as conditions 
warrant. In a smaller school, one person may perform several tasks.   
It must be understood that, initially, the SICM may be any member 
of your staff who discovers or is alerted to an incident prior to 
notification of the head of school/principal/director. 
Risk Analyst 
The risk analyst will be relied on to assess incurred injuries and 
evaluate medical risks associated with developing and occurring 
incidents.  Recommended personnel for this role include the 
school 
nurse, 
school 
psychologist, 
and 
student 
support 
coordinator.  Consideration of a school’s language requirements 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 7 of 42 
 
 
should also be included in selection of the risk analyst. 
Safety Coordinator  
The safety coordinator will be called upon to gather occupancy 
information and to support efforts to establish control at the 
incident site.  Recommended personnel for this role include 
School Registrar, School Police Officer, Safety Paraprofessional, 
Dean of Discipline, and Transportation Coordinator.  Since schools 
vary in size and range of staff, Principals and Headmasters are 
urged to explore their building’s total resources to assist in 
identifying this team member. 
Building Coordinator  
The building coordinator will meet and direct responding 
agencies to appropriate locations.  The building coordinator will 
also assess building security.  Due to familiarity and knowledge of 
the assigned school and its systems, the senior building custodian 
is the suggested primary designee for this role. 
Incident Scribe 
The incident scribe will be responsible for documenting the 
chronology 
of 
events. 
 
This 
position 
will 
require 
good 
organizational skills and willingness to support the rest of the on-
site Incident Control Team members.  Suggested staff includes the 
school secretary or the person in your building responsible for 
organizing student arrival and dismissal.   
Smaller schools with limited numbers of administrators or support 
staff may find it necessary to have team members perform more 
than one role. 
Classroom teachers are not recommended as potential members 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 8 of 42 
 
 
of the on-site team.  Experience indicates it is best for classroom 
teachers to remain with their assigned classes during critical 
events.  A resource guide for classroom teachers is included in the 
Emergency Response Guidelines.  
CENTRAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT  
The BPS adaptation of the Incident Command Structure will 
include the establishment of an off-site team that will support the 
efforts of the on-site team.  The components of this off-site Crisis 
Command Team will include Facilities Management, Emergency 
Management, Transportation, Superintendent’s Office, Student 
Support Services, Safety Services, and other areas that might be 
required as incidents evolve.  The external team will provide liaison 
support to any agency required by a situation.   
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 9 of 42 
 
 
Central Incident Management Team 
Group 
Primary 
Phone 
Facilities Management Executive Director of 
Facilities 
(617) 635-9126 
BPS Emergency 
Management 
Director of 
Emergency 
Management  
(857) 701-9404 
(617) 635-6082 
Transportation 
Chief of 
Transportation 
(617) 635-9520 
Behavioral Health 
Services (BHS) 
Chief of Student 
Services 
(617) 635-9676 
Safety Services 
Chief of Safety 
Services  
(617) 635-8000 
 
Superintendent’s 
Office 
Deputy Supt of 
Operations 
(617) 635-9643 
 
Office of Technology 
CIO/Director 
(617) 635-9200 
Communications  
Department 
Chief of 
Communications  
(617) 635-9265 
 
In many instances, this sophisticated level of staffing may not be 
required.  However, considering identified functions requiring 
performance in a crisis, the model ICS structure can be modified 
for a specific application to ensure completion of critical 
communications and data sharing tasks.  It is important to 
understand that the incident command system is driven by 
functions being performed and not simply staffing positions. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 10 of 42 
 
 
PUBLIC SAFETY RESPONSE 
Should an incident necessitate a response by non-school 
department public safety resources based on the assessment of 
the school SICM, they will be met by the building coordinator and 
informed of the nature of the incident and location of the school 
command post.  
Should conditions warrant, public safety personnel might assume 
primary responsibility and command.  The responding public 
safety officials may activate their own command post, at which 
time an official from the impacted school may be requested to 
take a position at that location. 
INCIDENT TYPE AND RESPONSE 
The BPS adaptation of the Incident Command System calls for 
classification of an event or developing situations to be 
categorized by the following tier level concepts.  The initial 
assessment must quickly determine if the best response is safe 
mode or evacuation. 
School related incidents will be classified according to a level of 
seriousness (Tiers I, II, III).  Appropriate school response to these 
tiers would be to initiate emergency procedures, standby or 
monitor the situation, or introduce proactive measures with 
careful monitoring of developing situations. The appropriate 
response or modes required by the SICM’s evaluation are defined 
as follows: 
Tier I – Any Situation That Requires Immediate 911 Response 
Tier II – Stand By and Response Planning Mode 
Tier III – Proactive Prevention and Monitoring Mode 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 11 of 42 
 
 
DEFINING INCIDENT RESPONSES BY TIER LEVEL 
Situations will be categorized by the Site Incident Control 
manager (SICM) as a Tier I, Tier II, or Tier III issue. 
Tier I – Presents Imminent Danger to Students, Staff, and 
Property beyond the School’s Ability to Control
● Bomb threat 
● Fire alarm 
● Armed person on or near 
site 
● Hostage situation 
● School bus accidents 
● Medical emergencies 
● Hazardous materials 
incident 
● Gas leak 
● Suicide threats 
● Fire 
● Explosion 
● Kidnapping 
● Sexual assault 
● Lost or missing children 
● Violent behavior 
● Psychiatric emergency 
● Chemical spills 
● Natural disasters
Tier II – Presents Potential Danger to Students, Staff and 
Property 
● Suicide warnings / signs of depression 
● Weather warnings 
● Environmental issues 
● Facilities failures 
● Increased gang activities 
● Communicable diseases 
● Custody issues 
Tier III – Conditions Indicate a Threatening Situation is in 
Formative Stage 
● Sexual harassment 
● Intimidating behavior 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 12 of 42 
 
 
● Increasing levels of vandalism 
● Inappropriate communications 
● Inappropriate internet use 
● Rumors 
● Other incidents that warrant further monitoring 
CRITERIA FOR DEFINING TIER LEVELS 
Tier I 
Tier I situations present imminent danger to students, staff, 
and property beyond the school’s ability to control and 
typically involve a 911 emergency response. 
Tier I situations require an immediate SICM assessment to 
determine the scope of response required, i.e., some 
situations requiring 911 response may be contained by the 
arrival of the appropriate responding 911 unit. For example, a 
relatively small laceration requiring sutures by EMS would 
not require the same scope of response as a bomb scare that 
requires evacuation of the building.   
The traditional response to emergencies that have school-
wide impact is often limited to school evacuation. These 
guidelines, in response to new dimensions in school safety, 
call for a determination by the SICM to identify if evacuation 
or safe mode is a component of the response for the situation 
at hand.  
In the Emergency Guidelines portion of this document, the 
terms Tier I – Red (Safe Mode) and Tier I – Green (Evacuation) 
are introduced to signal the SICM’s assessment to the specific 
situation at hand.   
Tier I – (Safe Mode): students and staff staying in place within 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 13 of 42 
 
 
the building is appropriate.  The safe mode may entail locking 
in place or relocation to another part of the building. 
Tier I – (Evacuation): evacuation from the building has been 
determined as the appropriate response.   
The use of the terms Tier I – Safe Mode and Tier I – Evacuation 
is limited to Tier I events.  
Please note that some Tier I (911) situations will not require 
use of the Red or Green designations; the laceration versus 
bomb scare example illustrates the distinctions that must be 
made regarding the scope of required response. The location 
of an armed person outside versus inside a building, or a 
hazardous material release near or in the school, illustrates 
the need for evaluating whether evacuation or a safe mode 
process should be implemented. 
The range of response required must be determined by the 
SICM.  The SICM determines if additional resources need to 
be activated.  The SICM also indicates if a Tier I – Evacuation 
or Tier I – Safe Mode situation exists. 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 14 of 42 
 
 
Tier II 
Tier II situations present potential danger to students, staff, 
and property. 
Tier II situations indicate that a standby and response-
planning 
mode 
is 
required.  This 
entails 
gathering 
information, developing plans, and notifying appropriate 
agencies.   
Tier II major situations could include neighborhood fires that 
potentially threaten nearby schools, or transportation 
accidents involving the transport of hazardous materials.  A 
less dramatic situation would be a power failure that might 
eventually require early dismissal or relocation of students. 
As in Tier I, the SICM determines the scope of response 
required. 
Tier III 
Tier III conditions indicate a threatening situation is 
developing. Collaboration and communication within and 
beyond the BPS support structure is required to ensure 
appropriate resources are engaged early to minimize further 
development of the threat.   
Preventative measures, including proactive engagement by 
required support functions or intervention by appropriate 
agencies during formative phases, will decrease the 
occurrence of critical incidents within our schools.  
Tier III situations are occurring daily throughout BPS schools.  
Tier III conditions encompass a broad spectrum of behavioral 
issues and involve both individuals and groups.  Many serious 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 15 of 42 
 
 
safety incidents are preceded by actions that should raise 
flags.  For example, the appearance of gang related clothing 
among students indicates the need for conversations with 
gang intervention personnel.  Suspicion of abuse or neglect, 
or the observance of depression warning signs in individuals, 
requires follow up by Student Support staff and possibly the 
engagement of external support providers.   
Tier III conditions are likely to be first observed by classroom 
teachers who become aware of behavior that warrants 
further monitoring.  
Observation and communication of Tier III situations, which 
receive prompt application of Safety Services and Student 
Support Services prevention practices and our expanded 
support resources, offer the greatest area for positive impact 
to our school safety environment.   
When members of the onsite Incident Control Team are 
informed or observe a Tier III situation, the SICM will identify 
and contact the appropriate resources. 
SECTION II: GUIDELINES 
Initial School Actions 
An individual discovering or receiving information about an 
incident will make a quick assessment and determine if an 
immediate 911 contact is required.  If the assessment indicates that 
911 supports are required, that individual should contact 911 and 
then proceed to notify the Site Incident Control manager (SICM). 
For all other situations, the SICM will make the initial assessment 
and then notify the onsite Incident Control Team (ICT) of the 
situation.  The SICM will also initiate contact with other required 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 16 of 42 
 
 
support groups as required. While awaiting the arrival of 
requested support, the SICM and ICT will use those critical minutes 
to initiate the following eight steps: 
1. Classify the tier level and determine the appropriate response 
mode: 
a. Contact 911 
b. Stand-by and response planning 
c. Proactive prevention and monitoring 
2. Implement evacuation or safe mode decision 
3. Establish communications 
4. Identify the danger zone 
5. Identify and request needed resources 
6. Open a command post 
7. Activate staging areas 
8. Compile occupancy data 
Further details for Steps 1-8 above are as follows: 
1. Classify the Tier level.                 
● Tier I:  
Any situation that requires a 911- assistance mode 
also requires that the need for an evacuation or 
containment response be assessed. 
● Tier II:  Standby and appropriate response planning mode. 
● Tier III:  Proactive / prevention and monitoring mode.  
Examples of specific tier incidents are included in the 
introduction section. 
2. Implement Evacuation or Safe Mode Procedures.   
Evacuation — Based upon assessment and policy, the SICM 
will determine the need for evacuation.  If evacuation is 
warranted, it will begin upon the communication of a 
predetermined signal (fire alarm, intercom, bell, buzzer, 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 17 of 42 
 
 
other).  All building occupants will respond to this signal and 
immediately evacuate according to prescribed routes.  
Notification procedures for Tier I – (Evacuation) should be 
entered in the computerized School Submittal Section of 
your (Step I, section d) school safety plan. 
Each school must have established primary and secondary 
evacuation routes 
to 
be followed 
during 
drills 
and 
emergencies. Evacuation routes, which are also an element 
of your Fire Safety Plan, should be inspected prior to 
utilization and the appropriate one determined during 
assessment of the situation.  
Assembly areas must also be predetermined for all school-
building occupants upon their exiting the school.  This is a 
critical time during an emergency, and student / staff 
accountability measures must be accomplished at this 
point. Evacuation may be to a primary, secondary, or to your 
off-site (alternate) location(s).  These locations require 
assessment during plan development, and at the time of the 
incident, to ensure adequacy.  This information will be 
entered in the computerized School Submittal Section (Step 
I, Section B) of your school safety plan. 
Safe Mode — Safe Mode is an alternative response to 
evacuation procedures. Notification procedures (Safe Mode) 
should be entered in the computerized School Submittal 
Section (Step I, Section D) of your school’s safety plan.  
Generally, evacuation to the outside has been our immediate 
response to an emergency signal.  Post incident analyses of 
serious incidents that have occurred across the country 
indicate that evacuation is not always the safest response to 
a situation.  Again, based upon assessment and policy the 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 18 of 42 
 
 
SICM will determine the need for safe mode.   
Safe Mode would commence upon a predetermined 
notification procedure.  Those contained or relocated will be 
directed to that identified site (a room number, common 
area, floor, other) and securing the location where you find 
yourself (and those for whom you are responsible) or securing 
the place to which you may be relocated in an emergency.  
This may simply require locking a door.  Again, these are 
critical 
times 
in 
an 
emergency 
and 
student/staff 
accountability measures must be accomplished at this point 
by SICM in accordance with school safety plans.   
3. Establish communications.  Each school will have in place a 
means and procedures for communicating in an emergency 
within their school and to outside public safety agencies.  All 
components of this process are required as part of your 
school submission.  This would also identify those assigned 
telephones or radios and individuals tasked with making 
necessary notifications.  
The individual discovering or receiving initial information 
about an incident is responsible to make a quick assessment 
and take the following steps: 
a. Life threatening situation(s) require immediate 911 
notification.  To notify public safety (police, fire, EMS) call 
911 via any available telephone.  A Fire Alarm pull station 
is to be used in the event of a fire related incident with a 
back-up telephone call to 911 or (617) 343-2880.  
Remember that activating a pull station will summon 
emergency 
assistance 
but 
will 
also 
initiate 
an 
evacuation that may not be appropriate for the 
situation.  


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 19 of 42 
 
 
b. The discoverer will then inform the SICM or an on-site 
Incident Control Team member of the situation. 
c. The SICM or available ICT member will classify the 
incident Tier level and assume management of the 
situation. 
4. Identify the danger zone.  In the assessment phase the best 
means of separating students/staff from any threat must be 
determined.  This may be accomplished by building 
evacuation 
or 
implementing 
containment/lockdown 
procedures.  A perimeter should be established and secured 
to keep students/staff away from the danger zone and in a 
safe area.  Moving people away from the threat, isolating and 
securing the affected area, and restricting access to non-
emergency personnel are techniques to separate the threat 
from students and staff. 
5. Identify and request needed resources.  As early as possible, 
the SICM must try to assess what resources are needed to 
mitigate the crisis and request those resources be made 
available. Support may come from the Central Incident 
Management Team or from outside sources.  The extent of 
required resources will be initially identified during the 
incident tier classification phase.  Supplementary resources 
may be requested by follow-on agencies. 
6. Open command post. The SICM should open a command 
post as soon as possible in the event of an incident.  It should 
be in a spot outside the danger zone from which the SICM 
can effectively manage the incident. The command post 
must have communications capability in order that the SICM 
has access to internal team members as well as public safety 
officials and the Central Incident Management Team.  There 
should be a level of security for the command post to prevent 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 20 of 42 
 
 
unnecessary interruptions by people not involved in the 
response, such as the media, parents, and onlookers.  Safety 
plans and school records must be available at this location.  
Locating primary and secondary command posts ahead of 
time allows you to quickly open a command post whenever 
it is needed.  You can predetermine sites because generally it 
is not important that you have a view of the danger zone.  
Many managers want to manage what they can see, but in a 
major critical incident the SICM must manage the entire 
scene, not just the source of the event.  It is suggested that 
primary and secondary sites be at opposite ends of the 
building.  Just because you have predetermined sites does 
not mean you are locked into using them.  As the SICM, you 
may be dealing directly on location at the source of the issue. 
7. Activate staging areas.  As with the command post, the 
staging areas should be predetermined and located outside 
the danger zone in an area that can be secured.  In the event 
of a major school incident, separate staging areas should be 
available for injured and ill persons, parents, and media 
representatives.  Directing members of these groups will be 
a function of the Incident Control Team building coordinator.  
8. Compile occupancy data.  As stated throughout these 
guidelines, student/staff accountability is essential in an 
emergency.  The following can be used to compile occupancy 
data in an emergency:    
● Daily class/student rosters 
● Daily staff/ employee/visitor sign-in sheets 
● Absentee list (students, staff, employee)  
● Field trip rosters 
● Current emergency information cards 
● Locker assignment list 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 21 of 42 
 
 
● Known restraining orders 
● Photo identification 
● Schedules 
● School bus assignments  
Any roster should be completed, as early as possible each day, 
in a form that can be readily taken from the building during an 
emergency.  Special attention should be given to document 
names of any student/staff member who is transported from 
the school or released to a parent.  Particular attention should 
be paid to ensure the location(s) of any student(s) or staff 
member that is (are) physically or visually impaired is known. 
SECTION II: OVERVIEW 
The above 8 steps are tailored to directly address Tier I situations.  
However, several of the steps are relevant to Tier II and Tier III 
incidents when applied to longer timelines.  Tier II, requiring 
standby and response planning, might utilize steps 3, 4 and 5 
initially, and depending on the situation may entail use of the 
remaining steps. 
Tier III events that occur over longer time periods would still 
require that communication and identification of appropriate 
proactive preventative measures be developed. 
Common sense prevails throughout these guidelines. Those of us 
in the schools understand that it is better to have a plan and no 
crisis than to have a crisis and no plan. 
These basic guidelines are not expected to cover every 
contingency. However, application of these simple steps will 
provide a consistent approach to handling any school incident.  As 
previously stated, the severity and your professional assessment of 
the incident will determine the scope of response.  


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 22 of 42 
 
 
School administrators and staff routinely implement some form of 
crisis response management during the discharge of their duties.  
The intent of the guidelines is to provide a flexible structure that 
will assist you in managing your response. 
The following pages contain an Emergency Response Guide to 
assist your handling of various situations.  It is designed for use as 
a handout for your Site Incident Control Team.  Included in the 
Guide is a section designed specifically for classroom teachers.   
The final section of this booklet is a hardcopy of information that 
you will be asked to compile.  The actual method of collection will 
utilize a Google document developed by the Office of Information 
Services.  The information submitted by your school will be stored 
in a consolidated database that will be reviewed and updated on 
an annual basis. 
SECTION III:  EMERGENCY RESPONSE GUIDE 
1. ASSESSING THE EMERGENCY RESPONSE 
The site incident control manager must identify and 
implement appropriate response. 
 
 
 


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 23 of 42 
 
 
SAFE MODE IF: 
EVACUATION IF: 
The situation presents a threat of 
illness, injury or death to persons 
moving in, around, or about the campus 
and it is determined that Safe Mode 
will provide a greater level of safety for 
those persons.      
● Riot 
● Shooting 
● Hazardous Material Spill 
(Outside) 
● Hostage Situation 
● Suicide 
The situation presents a threat of 
illness, injury or death to persons 
remaining inside a building and it is 
determined that evacuation will provide 
a greater level of safety for those 
persons. 
● Fire 
● Explosion 
● Hazardous Material Spill (Inside) 
● Hostage Situation 
● Bomb Threat 
● Gas Leak 
 
2. SAFE MODE — PERSONNEL ASSIGNMENTS 
All students are to remain contained until emergency 
responders advise otherwise. 
The following is a list of recommended assignments for 
faculty/staff members during a crisis requiring containment.  
* Asterisks denote Site Incident Control Team members. * 
 
* Principal/Assistant Principal (Site Incident Control Manager 
- SICM): Initiate safe mode. Safely monitor situations with 
available resources.  Identify and contact appropriate 
emergency responders and BPS support staff. 


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 24 of 42 
 
 
* Nurse (Risk Analyst): Set up staging area for ill and injured 
persons and administer initial first aid.  Keep ill people 
(overcome with stress and excitement) separate from the 
injured. 
* Registrar 
(Safety 
Coordinator): 
Gather 
occupancy 
information, present occupancy information to Emergency 
Responders. Use an alternative if school does not have a 
registrar. 
* Secretary (Incident Scribe): Continue 911 contact and remain 
on the telephone.  It is imperative that emergency 
responders maintain communication with someone inside 
the school.  Use an alternative if necessary.   
* Custodian (Building Coordinator): Close and lock all 
entry/exit points.  Stand by to assist emergency responders 
with accessibility to mechanical rooms. 
Classroom Teachers: Contain students. Keep classroom 
rosters.  Teachers in possession of cell phones should activate 
their phones.  Teachers should prepare students to follow 
further instructions. 
Assistants: Teachers on administrative duty or P&D periods 
should assist Incident Control Team (ICT) by checking the 
building for unattended students and moving them to 
supervised locations.  Assistants should be posted at 
entry/exit points to ensure that no one leaves the building 
and that only Emergency Responders enter the building. 
Volunteers: Report to office and be available to follow 
instruction. 
Cafeteria Staff: Close and contain cafeteria and kitchen.  Shut 
off appliances and remain in kitchen. 


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 25 of 42 
 
 
3. SAFE MODE PROCEDURES 
Incident Control Team: 
1. Call 911 – Advise reason for safe mode and stay on the line.  Do 
not hang up.  911 dispatchers will route the call to the 
appropriate agencies. 
2. Communicate to all staff that a Safe Mode situation exists and 
begin safe mode process. 
 
3. All school personnel will assume their specific assignments 
listed herein, exercising flexibility where needed to promote 
the safety of all persons. 
4. Staging areas should be set up separately for 1.) injured and 
2.) ill persons. 
5. During safe mode, no one except emergency responders or 
their designees will be permitted to enter, exit, or move about 
the campus. 
6. As additional emergency responders become available, they 
will assume some of the posted assignments to relieve school 
personnel. 
7. Ending the Safe Mode Status: When it has been determined 
by the emergency responders and the principal that 
conditions are safe to resume normal activities, the principal 
shall make an announcement via the P.A. system or send a 
messenger to advise each classroom. 
4. EVACUATION PROCEDURES 
1. Call 911. 
a. Advise reasons for evacuation and stay on the line if safe 
to do so. Do not hang up. 
b. 911 dispatchers will route the call to the appropriate 
agencies.  
2. Start evacuation procedures according to normal fire drill 


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 26 of 42 
 
 
procedures.  Communicate to staff that a TIER I – GREEN 
situation exists and begin the evacuation process.                                    
3. If the threat of an explosion is present, or a hazardous 
material spill has occurred, it may be necessary to move 
the students farther than a normal evacuation distance. 
 
4. Teachers: Bring roll book. It will be necessary to keep a 
roster of all students moved. Each teacher will be 
responsible for his/her class. The ICT safety coordinator will 
organize any dismissal of students. The release of each 
student must be documented. 
5. Staging areas should be setup separately for: 
a. injured 
b. ill persons 
c. parents 
d. media 
 
6. Students and employees with special needs may require 
assistance.  Paraprofessionals assigned to students and 
staff will remain with their assignments throughout the 
duration of the incident. 
7. Ending the Evacuation Status: When it has been 
determined by the emergency responders and the SICM 
that conditions are safe to resume normal activities, the 
SICM shall inform staff that it is safe to reenter the building. 
SECTION IV:  SCHOOL SUBMITTAL SECTION 
This is a mockup of the information you will submit via the BPS 
Intranet.  Please note the Intranet version will have a different 
appearance. 
STEP I:  
Please input the following information. 
▪ School Name: 
▪ Building Name: 
 


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 27 of 42 
 
 
▪ Address: 
 
▪ Principal/Head of School:  
▪ Telephone Number:   
▪ Fax Number:  
 
 
a. Identify primary and secondary command post locations: 
 
Primary Location 
Secondary Location 
Room Name 
 
 
Room Number 
 
 
Phone Number 
 
 
 
b. Identify primary and secondary external assembly areas: 
Primary Location 
Secondary Location 
 
 
 
c. Identify primary and secondary alternate school-site 
locations: 
Primary 
Phone 
Secondary 
Phone  
 
 
 
 
d. Identify your internal communications method(s) that your 
site will use to alert staff to the implementation of a Tier I 
(Evacuation) and a Tier I (Safe Mode) response: 


Page 28:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 28 of 42 
 
 
Tier I – Evacuation 
 
Tier I – Safe Mode 
 
STEP II:   Identify members of your on-site incident control team. 
Title 
Primary 
Alternate 
Responsibility 
Suggested 
Staff 
Site Incident 
Control 
Manager 
(SICM) 
 
Enter Private 
Phone Line,  
Cell Phone #, 
Other Phones 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Determine Tier level 
of event and contact 
resources required to 
address the situation, 
overall management 
of school students 
and staff, and 
ensures that 
superseding agencies 
directives are 
followed 
Principal as 
Primary; 
AP or other 
designee as 
Alternate 
Risk Analyst 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Assess injuries and 
medical risk analysis 
Nurse – Primary; 
Student Support 
Coordinator or 
Language 
Appropriate 
Individual – 
Alternate 


Page 29:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 29 of 42 
 
 
Title 
Primary 
Alternate 
Responsibility 
Suggested 
Staff 
Safety 
Coordinator 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Gather occupancy 
information, support 
efforts to establish 
control 
 
Building Registrar 
or equivalent  
Building 
Coordinator(s) 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Assess building 
security, meet 
responding agencies, 
and direct them to 
appropriate 
location(s) 
School Custodian 
and School Police 
Officer (if 
available) 
Incident 
Scribe 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Name: 
 
 
Phone #s: 
Log chronology of 
incident 
School Secretary – 
Primary 
Transportation 
Coordinator 
 
STEP III:  
Building Characteristics 
Please indicate if your site includes any of the areas listed below 


Page 30:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 30 of 42 
 
 
in the second column.  The third column should identify the 
location of the respective areas, as well as any other information 
requested in the third column. 
Common Areas 
Description 
Yes/No 
If Yes, List Location 
Auditorium 
 
 
Boiler Room 
 
Also identify if gas or oil is used. 
Cafeteria 
 
 
Computer Lab(s) 
 
 
Fire Escapes 
 
 
Gymnasium 
 
 
Hazardous Materials 
 
 
Health Center 
 
 
Library 
 
 
Loading Dock 
 
 
Nurses Office 
 
 
Out Buildings 
 
 
Playground 
 
 
Ramps 
 
 
Utility room 
 
 
List Others 
 
 
 


Page 31:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 31 of 42 
 
 
 
 


Page 32:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 32 of 42 
 
 
Does your building have the following? 
Description 
Yes/No 
If Yes, List Location 
Attic/Penthouse 
 
Indicate entry points on floor plans 
Basement or crawlspace access 
 
Indicate entry points on floor plans 
Community Center 
 
 
Elevators 
 
 
Fire Safety Systems 
 
 
Grounds Maintenance  
 
Identify chemical storage area(s) 
Kitchen Area 
 
Describe type of kitchen facility:  
satellite, full service, other 
Motion Detectors 
 
 
Pull Stations 
 
 
Security Systems 
 
 
Swimming Pool 
 
 
Vocational Shop Area 
Compressed gasses present? (1) 
Liquid fuels present? (2) 
(1) List 
here 
 
 
(2) List 
here 
 
 
 
If the school has a vocational area, please 
indicate location on floor plans. 
 


Page 33:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 33 of 42 
 
 
STEP IV:  
Occupancy Information 
The purpose of this section is to assist authorities in determining 
if a building evacuation is complete or to provide information 
regarding numbers of persons within the building. 
Description 
Numbers 
Additional Information / Comments 
Total Enrollment 
 
 
Total Staff 
 
 
For students/staff with disabilities (visual, hearing, mobility, 
medical, other) please provide all pertinent information required 
for assistance in an emergency. (Please use the space below.) 
 
PLEASE NOTE: Information in the blocks below should be 
supplied to authorities when emergency events occur.  Please 
develop appropriate measures to ensure that accurate and 
timely headcount information is available. 
Description 
Number 
Visitors 
 
Students off site (field trips, etc.) 
 
Staff off site (training, etc.) 
 
Other (list) 
 


Page 34:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 34 of 42 
 
 
STEP V: 
 
List Communications Equipment 
Please fill in categories as appropriate. 
1. Mobile Communication Devices 
Description 
Yes / 
No 
Quantity 
Assignee 
List Appropriate 
Numbers 
Status: 
O=Operational 
N=Non-operational 
Nextel 
Cell Phone 
2 Way Radio 
 
 
 
 
 
AT & T Ericsson 
Cell Phone 
 
 
 
 
 
Other Cell Phones 
 
 
 
 
 
Beepers/Pagers 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Portable Radios  
Description 
Yes / 
No 
Quantity 
Assignee 
List 
Appropriate 
Numbers 
Status 
O=Operational 
N =Non-operational 
Safety Staff  Two-
Way Radios 
 
 
 
 
 
In-House  
Two Way Radios 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Stationary Communications 


Page 35:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 35 of 42 
 
 
Description 
Yes / 
No 
Quantity 
Assignee 
List 
Appropriate 
Numbers 
Status 
O=Operational 
N =Non-
operational 
Intercom System 
 
 
 
 
 
PA System 
 
 
 
 
House Phones 
 
 
 
 
 
List Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Telephone Information 
Description 
Assignee 
Room 
Number 
Phone # 
Main Phone 
 
 
 
Principal’s Office 
 
 
 
Guidance Office 
 
 
 
Custodian’s Office 
 
 
 
Nurse’s Office 
 
 
 
ETF’s Office 
 
 
 
Student Support 
Coordinator’s Office 
 
 
 
Swimming Pool 
 
 
 
Safety Officer/Para 
 
 
 


Page 36:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 36 of 42 
 
 
Description 
Assignee 
Room 
Number 
Phone # 
Pay Phone(s) 
 
 
 
Phone System - Extension  
 
 
Phone System - Extension  
 
 
E-Mail Address 
 
 
 
Fax Machine(s) 
 
 
 
List All Direct Lines 
 
 
 
 
STEP VI: Floor Plans / Specific Site Information 
The following areas should be indicated on floor plans.  Facilities 
Management personnel will complete this section as noted in 
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 School Safety Contingency Plan. 
● Electrical Control Rooms And Panels 
● Utility Access/Controls 
● Classrooms/Labs 
● Interior Maintenance Areas 
● Engineering And Boiler Room Areas 
● Vocational Shop Areas 
● Swimming Pools 
● Grounds Maintenance Storage Areas 
● Kitchens And Food Storage Areas 
● Fire Standpipes And Sprinkler Connections 
● Roof Access, Include Skylights And Indicate Whether Or Not 
Operable 
● Domestic Water Controls 
● Basement Or Crawlspace Access 


Page 37:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 37 of 42 
 
 
● Indicate Which Walls Are Solid Masonry 
● Indicate Which Walls Are Framed Drywall 
 
For building systems, assess and indicate on the floor plans, the 
following: 
● Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems  
● Location and accessibility of air intakes 
● Filtration media location and accessibility 
● Shutdown procedures 
● Plumbing drainage  
● Fire sprinkler systems – emergency chemical 
decontamination use  
● Natural gas – use locations and shutoff(s) 
● Potable water – access to water supply 
● Electrical access/shutoff 
SCHOOL SAFETY / CONTINGENCY PLAN CHECKLIST 
The following is a list of items which should serve as a guide and 
checklist as you review and revise your School Safety / 
Contingency Plan.  These steps are essential to finalize your plan 
as complete, current, and ready in the event of an emergency.  
Please insert this checklist in your School Safety Plan book for 
reference. 
● Command Post Locations:  Are they located too close 
together as opposed to being appropriately separate for 
independent operations? 
● Assembly Areas:  Are they separate and distinct with your 
secondary location at a further distance away from the 
school? 
● Alternate Sites:  Are they realistic with accommodations to 


Page 38:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 38 of 42 
 
 
house all students expected to be relocated?  Have prior 
agreements been made with the Alternate Site host if these 
locations are not BPS properties?  Will transportation be 
required to relocate?  Will dismissal of students in 
accordance with School Department policy be a more 
practical option on the high school level? 
● Internal Communications:  Has consideration been given to 
the use of a system (examples:  public address, intercom, 
bell, messenger, school phones, portable radios), rather than 
the fire alarm for evacuation?  Keep in mind that sounding 
the fire alarm without other instructions will initiate a 
routine evacuation.  This may take building occupants 
through or to an unsafe area.  Safe Mode notification would 
be made via one of the examples given above. 
● Incident Control Team:  Have responsible members of your 
school-based staff been identified for all 
positions/functions?  Have these designated staff members 
been briefed on their duties? 
● Facility Components:  There may be a need for a more 
detailed explanation rather than simply some specifics (e.g., 
liquid fuel – gasoline for snow blowers is kept in an 
approved cabinet in the custodian's office, and security 
system – motion detectors in corridors and stairwells. 
● Disability Information:  Have all persons in your building 
needing assistance during an evacuation been identified?  
Have accommodations been made for safe refuge/ 
evacuation of students/staff requiring assistance in your 
school’s evacuation plan?  
● Communications Equipment and Telephone Information:  
Have all available means of communication between 
identified and portable telephones and radios been 


Page 39:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 39 of 42 
 
 
assigned to staff in accordance with your plan?  Has school 
email address been included?  Have you included Nextel 
direct radio numbers? 
FIRE SAFETY PLAN SECTION 
● Primary Entry for Fire Department:  Is this the location of 
your fire alarm control panel (annunciator)?  Is this your 
street address? 
● Egress:  Are exit doors unlocked from the inside during 
operating hours? 
● Records/Documentation:  Suppression system test 
certification applies to kitchen hood extinguishing system. 
● Evacuation Matrix:  Is there an exit identified for each 
classroom, office, and common area?  Do you have a “hard 
copy” of your evacuation plan included with your school 
plan?  Are prescribed evacuation routes posted for all 
building occupants? 
● Primary/Secondary Refuge:  These are approved locations 
inside the building where mobility impaired occupants 
could safely await evacuation.  Are they identified for each 
floor? 
● Training/Orientation:  Are all members of the school staff 
familiar with details and operation of your school plan?  Has 
the school plan been practiced?  Is the plan updated as 
needed?  Have staff signed off on their training?  Is this 
documentation maintained with your plan? 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The following is a list of publications and agencies that assisted in 
the development of the Boston Public Schools Safety 


Page 40:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 40 of 42 
 
 
Contingency Plans: 
● Emergency Response Guides, San Antonio Independent 
School District 
● Massachusetts Emergency Management Agency (MEMA) 
● Bristol County Sheriff’s Office, “Safe To Learn” 
● Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
● Massachusetts Executive Office of Public Safety, School 
Emergencies; Community Pre-Planning Guide 
● Laboratory at Brown University, Crisis Planning 
Management 
● Massachusetts Office of the Attorney General, Guidelines for 
a Crisis Management Plan 
● U.S. Department of Education 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 


Page 41:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 41 of 42 
 
 
Owner: 
Director of Emergency Management & Preparedness 
Department: 
Office of Emergency Management, Safety Services 
Mailing Address: 
205 Townsend Street Boston, MA 02121 
Phone: 
 (617) 635-6082 or (857) 701-9404 
Email: 
Operations-Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See template below to be used in classrooms to post evacuation routes 
 
(Updated 7.16.2024)


Page 42:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-01 
Page 42 of 42 
 
 
EMERGENCY EVACUATION 
 
ROOM ______  
LEAVE ROOM, GO ______  
USE STAIRWAY ______  
EXIT # ______ 


