Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
FSE-07 
Version 01 
 
 
 
PUBLIC HEALTH AND WORKPLACE SAFETY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
BACKGROUND 
In the past, concerns have been raised over the potential use of 
the U.S. Postal Service to conduct bioterrorist activity. In both 
New York and in Washington D.C., contents of three or four 
envelopes were tested positive for anthrax. In those cases where 
positive results were recorded, public health authorities dealt 
with this issue. 
The purpose of this memorandum is to provide guidelines for the 
handling of mail in the Boston Public Schools. In providing these 
guidelines, it is important to note that we have been informed by 
the Boston Public Health Commission that there have been no 
confirmed anthrax cases reported in either the Boston Public 
Schools or in the City of Boston.  
Your School Emergency Operations Guide (flip chart) will serve as 
an action reference on this subject. 
GUIDELINES 
The following guidelines are effective immediately and shall 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-07 
Page 2 of 9 
 
 
remain in place until otherwise ordered: 
1. Every responsibility center should assign one person and a 
backup person to sort and distribute mail. That person shall 
be supplied with rubber gloves and plastic bags to be used 
at their discretion. Training in the safe handling of mail will 
be provided. 
2. Techniques for safe handling of routine mail include the 
following: 
a. Examine all mail before opening to determine if it is 
suspicious. 
b. Isolate suspicious mail in a plastic bag. 
c. Open mail with a letter opener over a hard cleanable 
surface, holding the envelope upright so that the 
contents will not spill out. 
d. Examine the inside contents prior to removal. 
e. Never shake or wave any mail or contents of 
letters/packages. 
f. Ensure that food or drinks are not in the area while 
mail is handled. 
3. All mail and packages sent to internal offices/departments 
through the courier service should be sealed by the sender 
and the name and return address of the sending office 
clearly marked on the envelope/package. 
4. Characteristics of suspicious letters and packages include 
the following: 
a. No return address. 
b. Return address not matching city/state on the 
postmark. 
c. Stained, discolored mail or mail with an odor. 
d. Excessive postage/excessive weight. 
e. Lopsided or uneven envelope/packaging. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-07 
Page 3 of 9 
 
 
f. Improper address, illegible or poorly written address. 
g. Mail with visual threats on packaging materials. 
h. Unexpected mail with an international postmark. 
i. Ticking sound. 
j. Any combination of the aforementioned 
characteristics. 
5. Suspicious mail or packages should NOT be opened or 
jostled. It should be placed in a plastic bag and isolated for 
inspection by the responsibility center manager. 
6. If suspicious mail is already opened, it should be left on the 
desk/table and should NOT be handled further. It is 
suggested that it be covered with a plastic trash bag and 
the immediate area closed off. Refer to items 8 and 9 and 
follow the procedures outlined. 
7. If any powder or suspicious substance spills out of the 
envelope, cover it, close off and leave the immediate area, 
wash your hands with soap and water and notify your 
responsibility center manager. 
8. When suspicious mail has been received, the responsibility 
center manager should call 911 and notify the 
Superintendent's Office. Our protocol does not call for 
evacuation of the building unless so directed by public 
safety officials. 
9. All persons who handled suspicious letters/packages should 
wash their hands with soap and water. 
Attached for informational and review purposes are public health 
fact sheets prepared by the Boston Public Health Commission. 
Please keep this memorandum available for reference. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-07 
Page 4 of 9 
 
 
ATTACHMENT A 
 
PUBLIC HEALTH FACT SHEET 
Communicable Disease Control 
1010 Massachusetts Ave, Boston MA 02118 
617-534-5611 
ANTHRAX 
What is anthrax? 
Anthrax is a disease caused by a bacterium called Bacillus 
anthracis. Anthrax most commonly occurs in animals, but it can 
also infect people. Anthrax has the potential to be used as a 
biological weapon. In late 2001, terrorism related Anthrax cases 
were found in Connecticut, New York City, New Jersey, Florida, 
and Washington DC.  
How is anthrax spread? 
Anthrax can be spread by touching it (when there’s a cut on the 
skin), breathing it in, or eating meat contaminated with Anthrax. 
It is not contagious. An infected person cannot give it to others. 
What are the symptoms of anthrax? 
Symptoms of the disease vary depending on how the disease 
was contracted, and usually occur within 7 days, but can take up 
to 60 days to appear.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-07 
Page 5 of 9 
 
 
• Cutaneous (skin form): Most anthrax infections occur when 
bacteria enter the skin. The infection begins as a raised itchy 
bump that resembles an insect bite, but within several days 
develops into a blister. The blister ulcerates and forms a 
black area in the center. With prompt treatment, the vast 
majority of people recover fully.  
• Inhalation: Initial symptoms may resemble the flu with 
fever, chills, and muscle aches. After several days, the 
symptoms progress to severe breathing problems and 
shock. In the past, death occurred 1-2 days after the onset of 
symptoms. However, during the recent outbreak of anthrax 
in the United States, with prompt treatment more than half 
of the people who developed inhalation anthrax survived.  
• Intestinal: This form of anthrax occurs from eating 
contaminated meat. Symptoms include nausea, loss of 
appetite, vomiting, fever, and are followed by abdominal 
pain, vomiting of blood, and severe diarrhea.  
Can I acquire anthrax from another person? 
Person-to-person spread of anthrax is not known to occur. Only 
people directly exposed to anthrax spores could develop disease. 
Is there an anthrax vaccine? 
There is a limited amount of anthrax vaccine available in the 
United States; however, most people are not routinely vaccinated 
against anthrax unless they fall into a high-risk group such as 
military personnel. The anthrax vaccine requires 6 shots over a 
period of 18 months with follow-up shots. Anthrax vaccines 
intended for animals should not be used in humans.  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-07 
Page 6 of 9 
 
 
Is there a treatment for anthrax? 
Doctors can prescribe antibiotics that work against anthrax. To 
be effective, treatment should be initiated early. If left untreated, 
the disease can be fatal. In Massachusetts, all cases of suspected 
anthrax are required to be reported immediately to local health 
departments. In Boston, suspected cases should be reported to 
Boston Public Health Commission at 617-534-5611. 
For more information call the BPHC Bioterrorism Information 
Line at 617-534-2362 or visit http://www.bphc.org 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-07 
Page 7 of 9 
 
 
ATTACHMENT B 
 
PUBLIC HEALTH FACT SHEET 
Communicable Disease Control 
1010 Massachusetts Ave, Boston MA 02118 
617-534-5611 
 
BIOTERRORISM 
What is Bioterrorism?  
Bioterrorism is a form of terrorism in which infectious biological 
agents, such as bacteria, viruses, or toxins are used (or are 
threatened to be used) against another person to create fear and 
disrupt normal daily activities. Use or threatened use of such 
agents is a Federal crime and is thoroughly investigated by the 
Boston Police Department, FBI, and other agencies. 
What is the Boston Public Health Commission doing to prepare 
for a possible bioterrorist event?  
The Boston Public Health Commission (BPHC) has been 
preparing for potential bioterrorism for several years. BPHC has 
been working with health care providers and others in the city to 
develop an early warning system for possible bioterrorist attacks. 
This system will allow city officials time to implement steps to 
prevent further illness. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-07 
Page 8 of 9 
 
 
How will I know if I have been exposed to an infectious 
biological agent?  
Most bioterrorist threats to date have been hoaxes, so often 
people only think they have been exposed to a bioterrorist agent. 
If you suspect you have been exposed to a biological agent, notify 
emergency personnel immediately by calling 911. Boston Police, 
Fire, Emergency Medical Services, and Public Health Commission 
will work together to collect and identify the suspect material.  
If I actually were exposed to an infectious biological agent, what 
symptoms should I look for?  
Different viruses, bacteria, and toxins may be used as 
bioterrorism agents, and each may cause different symptoms. 
Often however, they resemble either the flu or food poisoning. 
People who are exposed may experience fever, chills, headache, 
body aches, and muscle weakness. Others may experience 
coughing, diarrhea, abdominal cramping, nausea, and vomiting. 
It is important to remember that these symptoms are common 
of many illnesses and are not usually the result of bioterrorist 
events. 
How long would it take for symptoms to appear?  
The length of time it takes for symptoms to appear can vary 
greatly depending on the type of agent used. Symptoms can 
appear between several hours to several weeks after exposure.  
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-07 
Page 9 of 9 
 
 
What can be done if I am exposed to a biological agent?  
For many of these agents, treatment is available. However, it is 
very important for treatment to begin early. Therefore, if you 
suspect you may have been exposed to one of these agents, see a 
health care provider as soon as possible.  
 For more information call the BPHC Bioterrorism Information 
Line at 617-534-2362 or visit the Boston Public Health 
Commission, http://www.bphc.org. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Emergency Management and 
Preparedness 
Department: Safety & Emergency Management 
Mailing 
Address: 
205 Townsend Street Boston, MA 02121 
Phone: 
(857) 701-9404 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


