Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
FSE-03 
Version 01 
 
 
 
BUILDING CODES AND FIRE REGULATIONS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
All school buildings are required to comply with Massachusetts 
State Building Codes and Fire Regulations. Adherence to these 
regulations helps to ensure a safe, secure, and accessible learning 
and work environment for students and staff. 
As the person responsible for the school building, the head of 
school/principal/program director shall have responsibility for 
monitoring and maintaining compliance with building codes and 
fire regulations at all times. Staff assigned to the Department of 
Facilities Management and the fire safety director are available 
and should be called upon to assist and support the school 
building administrator in this effort. 
The Inspectional Services Department (ISD) of the City of Boston 
will conduct annual egress inspections, and the Boston Fire 
Department (BFD) will conduct quarterly inspections to assure 
compliance with the state codes and fire regulations. ISD shall 
issue certificates of inspection for occupancy annually to schools 
which comply. Schools in noncompliance will not be allowed to 
open until the deficiencies are corrected and a certificate 
granted. During every school year, ISD building inspections will 
be conducted annually. However, special inspections can be 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-03 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
 
made at any time to assure continued compliance. 
The following guidelines have been mutually agreed upon by the 
ISD and the Boston Public Schools and should assist your efforts 
and those of your staff in maintaining compliance. They must be 
adhered to throughout the year, not just at the time of 
inspection. They are as follows: 
1. All paths of egress must be clear of any furniture and 
materials. 
2. Materials or equipment cannot be stored under/near 
stairwells or in corridors. 
3. Broken furniture must be discarded and not abandoned in 
the corridor. 
4. Teaching and learning is NOT permitted in hallways and 
stairwells. 
5. All doors must be clear of artwork/decorations and 
functional in case of an emergency.  
6. All fire doors must be kept closed at all times, except when 
students are passing between classes or when they have 
been modified as part of a new fire alarm system. 
7. NO CHAINS OR PADLOCKS ON ANY DOORS IN ANY 
BUILDING. 
8. Bars, chains, or other restricted operations of doors are not 
authorized at any time. 
9. Deadbolts or locks may not be used on connecting 
classroom doors. 
10. Classroom connecting doors can not be blocked (essential 
egress). 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-03 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
 
11. Papers and art work hanging from light fixtures must be 
removed. 
12. Using auditorium stages as classrooms is prohibited. 
13. Covering classroom heating systems with combustibles 
(books and papers) is a fire hazard and is NOT permitted. 
14. All electrical and boiler rooms must be locked at all times 
and must not be used for storage. 
15. All fire extinguishers must be charged and have a current 
inspectional tag attached. 
16. All gasoline and flammable liquids must be stored in 
fireproof cabinets. 
17. Corridor displays and decorations are limited to bulletin 
boards and must not cover more than 10% of the total 
corridor wall space and 20% of classroom wall space.  
18. Stairwells and exit doors shall be clear of all flammable 
materials.  
19. Paper materials displayed shall be attached directly to the 
walls and shall not be permitted to cover an egress door or 
be placed within five feet of an egress door, unless approved 
by the AHJ. The ONLY things permitted to be posted on or 
within 5 feet of a door are (1) evacuation routes and (2) the 
classroom’s emergency folder/kit (3) the SafeMode window 
cover the classroom utilizes. 
20.  All rugs, curtains, and furniture must be certified as fire 
retardant and code compliant. 
21. Only electrical appliances authorized by Facilities 
Management are permitted. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-03 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
 
22. Snow blowers and lawn mowers are to be run dry of fuel 
after each use and before being brought into the building. 
23. Classrooms must be kept clean and orderly. 
Your cooperation in maintaining the standards outlined above 
will ensure a quick and successful certification process. 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FSE-03 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Emergency Management & 
Preparedness 
Department: 
Office of Emergency Management, Safety 
Services  
Mailing Address: 
21 Deckard St - Room B28, Boston, MA 02121 
Phone: 
(857) 701-9404 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
OR 
Name: 
Executive Director of Facilities Management  
Department: 
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 
1216 Dorchester Avenue, Dorchester, MA 
02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9135 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


