Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
HRS- L03 
Version 01 
 
 
LICENSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR PRINCIPALS/HEADS 
OF SCHOOL AND BASAS EMPLOYEES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
All principals and heads of school as well as most BASAS 
employees are required to hold one of five administrative licenses 
issued by the State of Massachusetts Department of Elementary 
and Secondary Education (DESE).   
TYPES OF ADMINISTRATOR LICENSES 
The DESE issues the following five administrator licenses:  
• Superintendent/Assistant Superintendent 
• Principal/Assistant Principal 
• Supervisor/Director 
• Special Education Administrator 
• School Business Administrator 
REQUIREMENTS BY ADMINISTRATOR POSITION 
The BPS positions/titles below require the following licenses in 
the appropriate grade level(s):   
 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L03 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
 
BPS Position/Title 
Required License 
Principal / Head of School 
Principal/Assistant Principal 
Assistant Principal / Head of 
School 
Principal/Assistant Principal 
Academy Director 
Supervisor/Director OR 
Principal/Assistant Principal 
Academy Leader 
Supervisor/Director OR 
Principal/Assistant Principal 
Director of Instruction 
Supervisor/Director OR 
Principal/Assistant Principal 
Director of Alternative 
Education 
Supervisor/Director OR 
Principal/Assistant Principal 
Small Learning Community 
Leader 
Supervisor/Director OR 
Principal/Assistant Principal 
Director of Curriculum, 
Assessment and Placement 
Supervisor/Director OR 
Principal/Assistant Principal 
Senior Curriculum Access 
Specialist 
Special Education Administrator 
license OR Moderate/Severe 
Disabilities teaching license in 
combination with Principal/ 
Assistant Principal license. 
Senior Curriculum Manager 
Principal/Assistant Principal OR 
Supervisor/Director OR Special 
Education Administrator license 
Senior Program Director 
Principal/Assistant Principal OR 
Supervisor/Director OR Special 
Education Administrator license 
Program Director 
Principal/Assistant Principal OR 
Supervisor/Director OR Special 
Education Administrator license 
Some BASAS classifications may require licensure depending 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L03 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
 
upon the types of duties performed.  If a BASAS member is 
responsible for the “Planning, Implementing, or Developing of 
Curriculum and Instruction” (for 50% or more of their time), they 
must hold an administrator license.  Additionally, if the BASAS 
administrator is responsible for the “Evaluation of Employees,'' 
they must hold an administrator license. 
If they are responsible for the planning, implementing, or 
developing of Curriculum and Instruction, or the evaluation of 
employees, the following BPS employees must hold these 
licenses: 
BPS Position/Title 
Required License 
Senior Coordinator 
Principal/Assistant Principal or 
Supervisor/Director or Special 
Education Administrator license  
Coordinator 
Junior Coordinator 
Director 
Assistant Director 
Bilingual Program Specialist 
Senior Program Coordinator 
MEETING MASSACHUSETTS STATE LICENSURE REQUIREMENTS 
The following information outlines general guidelines that 
principals, heads of school, and relevant BASAS employees 
should follow to meet Massachusetts state licensure 
requirements.  The DESE will determine individual licensure 
requirements upon review of the administrator’s application. 
1. Pass the Massachusetts Test for Educator Licensure (MTEL) 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L03 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
 
in Communication and Literacy Skills.  To register for the 
MTEL, go to: http://www.doe.mass.edu/mtel/. 
2. Complete the licensure requirements for the administrator 
role sought through one of the available routes: 
a. Complete an Approved Program of Study.  DESE 
approves educator preparation programs sponsored by 
higher education, professional associations, 
collaboratives, school districts, charter schools, and 
other organizations.  Approved programs are designed 
to meet the requirements for a specific administrator 
license.  The DESE website, 
http://www.doe.mass.edu/edprep, contains a list of 
approved administrator preparation programs. 
b. Complete an Administrative 
Apprenticeship/Internship. This route to licensure is 
primarily a field-based experience requiring a 
minimum of 300-500 hours depending on the license 
being pursued in the role of the license sought. 
Candidates completing this route must be guided by a 
trained mentor (who has held a professional license in 
the same role for at least three years) and participate in 
seminars, workshops, and other opportunities that will 
assist the candidates in adequately addressing the 
Professional Standards for Administrators.  
c. Be recommended for licensure through the Panel 
Review process.  This route is only available for 
administrator licensure candidates who have specific 
prerequisite experiences and for all superintendent 
candidates. 
3. Apply for licensure and make payment through the online 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L03 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
 
process: (https://www.doe.mass.edu/licensure/apply-check-
status-license.html). 
4. Submit the following supporting documentation and 
information to the DESE:  
a. One of the following: 
i. Approved program endorsement 
ii. Administrative Apprenticeship/Internship 
Endorsement Form.  This form is accessible 
through the Guidelines for Administrator Routes 
to Initial Licensure: 
http://www.mass.gov/edu/docs/ese/educator-
effectiveness/licensing/panel-review-
administrator-routes.pdf  
b. A letter written on official letterhead by the 
superintendent/designee, principal, or previous 
employer that documents the candidate has 
completed three years of employment in the role of the 
current license or other required experience. 
c. Successful completion of the Performance Assessment 
for Initial License. Applicants for the Principal/Assistant 
Principal license are required to successfully complete 
the Performance Assessment for Initial Licensure 
(MA_PAL).  This requirement is currently under 
development for all other administrative licenses. 
Licensure can be granted to those who satisfy all other 
licensure requirements prior to this requirement 
becoming available. 
   
d. Official transcripts of undergraduate/graduate studies 
if required for specific license. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L03 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
 
 
More information about the requirements for the administrator 
licenses is available through the Guidelines for Administrator 
Routes to Initial Licensure:  
http://www.mass.gov/edu/docs/ese/educator-
effectiveness/licensing/panel-review-administrator-
routes.pdf  
PROCESS FOR REPORTING LICENSURE TO THE OFFICE OF 
HUMAN RESOURCES 
It is the responsibility of principals, heads of school, and relevant 
BASAS employees, as well as their supervisors, to ensure proper 
licensure is in place and recorded in the “BPS Licenses” section of 
PeopleSoft (found under “Workforce Development”) which is 
maintained by the Office of Human Resources via an electronic 
download from the Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education.  
PROCESS FOR LICENSURE RELATED VERIFICATIONS 
All educators and other employees seeking licensure related 
verifications and/or loan forgiveness must complete the BPS 
Educator Licensure-Related Verification Requests form.   
 
 
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L03 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
 
For more Information about this circular, contact: 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Fax: 
617-635-7956 
Email: 
employeeservices@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


