Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
HRS-PP14 
Version 01 
 
PAID LEAVE FOR CANCER SCREENING AND/OR LIVING 
ORGAN DONATION 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Two additional paid leave benefits are available to City of Boston 
employees for annual cancer screenings and living organ 
donations. 
ANNUAL CANCER SCREENING 
The mayor has signed an executive order that allows all City of 
Boston employees to use up to four (4) hours of leave per 
calendar year for various types of cancer screening.  (Types of 
cancer screening that fall under the four hours off per year policy 
are as follows: breast, prostate, colon, skin, thyroid, oral cavity, 
lymph nodes, reproductive organs, and lungs). 
The following procedure is in effect in the Boston Public Schools: 
• Employees will be allowed up to four (4) hours of leave, per 
calendar year, that can be used intermittently or in one (1) 
four-hour period. 
• Employees must make a request through their 
Responsibility Center manager. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP14 
Page 2 of 4 
 
• A signed copy of a medical document verifying the date that 
the employee was given a cancer screening must be filed 
with the Responsibility Center manager. 
• This time is not charged to any accumulated sick leave; and 
time in position, creditable service, pay, leave and health 
benefits are all protected while on this type of leave.  
To report time for an annual cancer screening, please add an 
absence event on the timesheet using the absence name “Pre-
Cancer Screening.” 
LIVING ORGAN DONATION 
Effective October 3, 2006, the mayor has issued an executive 
order adopting An Act Relative to Living Organ Donation which 
grants leave of absence without loss of pay for living organ 
donation.  It applies to leave taken by an employee to provide live 
organ donation to be transplanted into another individual. Live 
organ donation includes donation of kidney, liver, pancreas, lung, 
intestine, or heart (domino transplants). 
All City of Boston employees are eligible for this leave, which 
includes full-time, part-time, seasonal, and temporary employees 
eligible for paid leave benefits. It does not include independent 
contractors, substitutes, cab monitors, transportation attendants, 
intermittent, or any other employees who are not eligible for paid 
leave benefits.  
The following procedure is in effect in the Boston Public Schools: 
• Employees will be allowed a maximum total of 30 days of 
paid leave in a calendar year to donate an organ.   
• This time only covers days taken for the medical procedure 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP14 
Page 3 of 4 
 
and the recovery from it.  
• Part-time employees will receive a prorated portion of the 
30 days based on their part-time schedule. 
• Leave can be used intermittently. 
• Employee must obtain a letter on a physician’s letterhead 
disclosing that the employee is approved to be a live organ 
donor and the type of organ being donated. 
• A signed copy of a medical document verifying the date of 
the living organ donation procedure that the employee has 
undergone must be submitted to Human Resources 
through their Responsibility Center manager (e.g., principal 
or department head). 
• This time is not charged to any accumulated sick leave; time 
in position, creditable service, pay, leave, and health benefits 
are protected while on this type of leave.  
To report time for a living organ donation, please add an 
absence event on the timesheet using the absence name 
“Organ Donation.” 
Questions on specific health insurance coverage should be 
directed to Health Benefits and Insurance at 617-635-4570 or to 
your health insurance provider. More information about live 
organ donation may be found at the following link: 
https://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/resources/living-donation  
 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP14 
Page 4 of 4 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Employee Services 
Department: 
Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9255 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
ohrleaves@bostonpublicschools.org  
  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


