Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PM07A 
Version 01 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF NON-CLASSROOM 
PARAPROFESSIONALS 
INCLUDED EMPLOYEES IN THIS CIRCULAR: 
● Community Field Coordinator (CFC) 
● Health Para 
● Library Para 
● Physical Ed Para 
● Security Para 
● Sign Language Interpreter 
● Swim Para 
● Cota Para 
● Family Liaison 
FORMAL EVALUATION 
All staff shall be formally evaluated using standards and 
indicators reasonably related to a paraprofessional performance, 
with a mark for each standard and an overall rating.  Overall 
ratings shall be: “Exemplary,” “Proficient,” “Needs 
Improvement,” and “Unsatisfactory,” and shall be transmitted to 
Paraprofessionals by the last business day prior to May 15 via the 
VectorEvals platform. If the para has access to a BPS-issued 
computer, they may sign digitally. If the para does not, the form 
must be printed from VectorEvals for them to sign and then 
uploaded as a PDF attachment to the digital form. 
Paraprofessionals will generally be evaluated formally every two 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07A 
Page 2 of 8 
 
years, except as set forth in section 7 below.  During each school 
year, each principal/head of school or director will identify 
approximately one-half of the staff for which that administrator is 
responsible for evaluating during that year.  The process of 
identifying the evaluees will be determined by the responsible 
administrator.  An administrator may also evaluate a staff 
member not originally identified, if assistance, supervision, or 
intervention is deemed appropriate based on informal 
observation. 
EVALUATORS 
1. No supervisor shall supervise or evaluate a relative. 
2. The head of school, principal, or other administrative head 
outside of the bargaining unit will be responsible for all 
evaluations.  However, they may be assisted by other 
qualified persons (who are not members of the bargaining 
unit) designated by the School Department 
SCHEDULE, MEETINGS, AND PROCEDURES 
1. At the beginning of each school year, the responsible 
administrator or their designee shall meet with 
Paraprofessionals for the purpose of explaining the 
evaluation program and instrument and answering 
questions.  The building administrator may be assisted by 
other qualified persons designated by the School 
Department. Classroom visits may be a combination of 
announced and unannounced visits. 
For any classroom visit resulting in written feedback 
indicating a deficiency in the paraprofessional’s practice, the 
responsible supervisor shall provide such written feedback 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07A 
Page 3 of 8 
 
to the paraprofessional before releasing the next Formative 
or Summative Evaluation. 
2. Within ten (10) school days during which the 
paraprofessional is present following the last observation to 
be used as the basis of the evaluation, regardless of the 
rating mark, the responsible administrator or designee shall 
meet with the paraprofessional for the purpose of 
discussing the evaluation.  At this meeting, the 
paraprofessional will be given two (2) copies of the written 
evaluation, signed, and dated by the responsible 
administrator.  
The paraprofessional shall sign and return one (1) copy to 
indicate having received it, but not to indicate agreement or 
disagreement.  No paraprofessional shall be asked to sign an 
incomplete evaluation form.  Paraprofessionals shall be 
allowed to attach their written comments to the evaluation 
form.  A paraprofessional whose overall performance has 
been judged as less than proficient at any point during the 
school year shall be so notified in writing and shall meet 
directly with the responsible administrator. 
3. In any area where the responsible administrator or designee 
indicates a need for improvement, they will provide the 
paraprofessional with a written prescription.  The 
paraprofessional may attach comments to the prescription.      
If a paraprofessional’s performance results in an overall 
formative evaluation or summative evaluation rating of 
“Needs Improvement” or “Unsatisfactory”, the evaluation 
prescription may contain a requirement that a 
paraprofessional takes advantage of additional professional 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07A 
Page 4 of 8 
 
development training or other opportunities offered by or 
through the School Department to correct a weakness or 
deficiency which caused the less than proficient rating.  For 
purposes of this contract, “formative” means evaluations 
that at a minimum are twenty (20) school days apart.   
If, after allowing adequate time to improve, the 
paraprofessional continues to need improvement, the 
responsible administrator may include in the evaluation 
prescription that the paraprofessional may voluntarily take 
advantage of training or in-service training to correct a 
deficiency.  
4. If the responsible administrator had adjudged a 
paraprofessional’s practice with an overall rating of 
“Unsatisfactory” on at least four (4) formative evaluations 
within a twelve (12) month period in which the 
Paraprofessional reported to work or on at least (2) 
formative evaluations plus a summative evaluation, the 
responsible administrator may initiate termination by 
recommending to the Superintendent that such 
paraprofessional be terminated. If the Superintendent 
approves the principal’s recommendation, the principal shall 
notify the paraprofessional, in writing, of their intent to 
dismiss the paraprofessional. The paraprofessional may then 
request a meeting with the principal to discuss their intent 
to dismiss. This request must be made in writing within ten 
(10) days of the paraprofessional’s receipt of the intent to 
dismiss notice. Overall “Unsatisfactory” evaluation ratings 
need not occur in consecutive months.  
An overall rating of “Unsatisfactory” on a summative 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07A 
Page 5 of 8 
 
evaluation rating must be preceded by at least two 
formative overall “Unsatisfactory” ratings during that school 
year.  A paraprofessional may be removed from the 
classroom, dismissed, or suspended for just cause prior to 
the completion of the prescriptive period specified in this 
paragraph.  
5. After each of the first three (3) formative evaluation overall 
“Unsatisfactory” ratings that are based in whole or in part 
upon observed performance, the responsible administrator 
shall conduct a follow-up evaluation. This evaluation shall 
include observation of performance and take place no 
sooner than twenty (20) school days and no later than fifty 
(50) school days after the previous “Unsatisfactory” 
evaluation.  
If an overall formative evaluation “Unsatisfactory” rating is 
based upon other than performance, then the responsible 
administrator must clearly convey the reasons in writing to 
the paraprofessional and follow prescribed procedures for 
progressive discipline.  
6. A formative or summative evaluation with an overall 
“Unsatisfactory” rating shall be maintained as a permanent 
part of the employee’s personnel record and may be grieved 
and arbitrated. an employee may grieve a summative 
evaluation with an overall rating other than “Unsatisfactory” 
up to but not beyond the level of the Step 2 hearing officer, 
who shall have the authority to rectify the grievance. Any 
such grievance shall be dealt with expeditiously.  In the 
event of a concurrent dismissal, the grievances shall be 
merged and treated as a single grievance. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07A 
Page 6 of 8 
 
Notwithstanding the above, disputes concerning the 
paraprofessional's rating in any of the individual standards 
found within a formative or summative evaluation not 
resulting in an overall "Unsatisfactory" rating are neither 
grievable nor arbitrable. Similarly, disputes concerning 
comments made by the responsible administrator within an 
observation or formative and summative evaluation are 
neither grievable nor arbitrable. 
7. The following individuals shall be evaluated annually prior to 
November 15 if possible: 
a. Paraprofessionals who were evaluated during the 
previous school year as “Unsatisfactory” overall or in a 
particular area. 
b. All paraprofessionals who are new to the building. 
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07A 
Page 7 of 8 
 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
By the last business day 
prior to November 15 
● Evaluation of Paraprofessionals who 
received an “Unsatisfactory” in their 
evaluation from the prior school year. 
● Evaluation of Paraprofessionals who are 
new to the school building. 
By the last business day 
prior to May 15  
● Deadline to submit evaluation on 
VectorEvals platform.  
* If the para has access to a BPS-issued 
computer, they may sign digitally. If 
para does not, the form must be 
printed from VectorEvals for them to 
sign and then uploaded as a PDF 
attachment to the digital form.  
● Evaluation of paraprofessionals due 
every 2 years except for 
paraprofessionals new to the building 
or who received a “Does Not Meet 
Standards” rating the previous school 
year. 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07A 
Page 8 of 8 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
 
Owner: 
Director of Evaluation and Performance 
Management 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Boston, MA 
02119 
 
 
Email: 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org 
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
► Click to view a SAMPLE Non-Classroom Paraprofessional 
Evaluation Form (PDF). Evaluators should use VectorEvals to 
submit their evaluations. 
 


