Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-L02 
Version 01 
 
REQUIREMENTS FOR PARAPROFESSIONALS  
UNDER ESSA 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The US Department of Education Every Student Succeeds Act 
(ESSA) requires that all instructional paraprofessionals meet 
specific employment requirements in order to be designated 
“Highly Qualified”. These requirements apply to all schoolwide 
programs without regard to whether the positions are funded 
with federal, state, or local funds. To be considered Highly 
Qualified, paraprofessionals will need to possess specific skills in 
reading, writing, math, and instruction (as outlined in 
Attachment A of this Superintendent’s Circular).  
I. ESSA REQUIREMENTS FOR PARAPROFESSIONALS 
There are currently two available options for paraprofessionals to 
be deemed Highly Qualified: 
● Pathway 1: Associate’s Degree or 48 Credit Hours of 
Coursework 
The paraprofessional obtained an Associate’s (or higher) 
degree OR completed at least 48 credit hours of 
coursework at an institution of higher education (IHE). If 
this pathway was selected the paraprofessional should 
submit to the Principal/Headmaster all relevant transcripts. 
 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 2 of 12 
 
● Pathway 2: Formal Standardized Assessment 
The paraprofessional passed a formal standardized 
assessment. The Massachusetts ESE has selected both the 
ParaPro Assessment and the WorkKeys Certificate of 
Proficiency for Teacher Assistants as the formal state-
endorsed assessments. Either of these assessments will 
enable instructional paraprofessionals to meet this 
requirement. If this pathway is selected the 
paraprofessional should submit to the 
Principal/Headmaster an official score report confirming a 
passing score.  
II.  RESOURCES FOR PATHWAY 2 
Information about the ParaPro Assessment, including content 
overview, and registration can be accessed on-line at 
http://www.ets.org/parapro. The test is generally offered as a 
paper/pencil test given four times per year at Roxbury 
Community College. BPS does not currently administer the 
Internet-based ParaPro test. A scaled score of 464 must be 
achieved in order to pass and be deemed “Highly Qualified”. 
Information about the WorkKeys Proficiency Certificate for 
Teacher Assistants can be accessed on-line at 
http://www.act.org/workkeys/. It consists of a three-part 
assessment as well as an observation-based tool known as the 
Instructional Support Inventory (ISI). It is administered by 
WorkSource Partners, Inc., One Harvard Street, Ste 200, 
Brookline, MA  02445 (phone: 617-232-0330). To meet the 
requirements of ESSA, paraprofessionals must achieve at the 
following skill levels on the three-part assessment: 
● Reading for Information: Skill Level 5  


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 3 of 12 
 
● Applied Mathematics: Skill Level 4  
● Business Writing: Skill Level 3  
III. FEDERAL DEFINITIONS 
Definition of Instructional Paraprofessional  
An instructional paraprofessional is an individual who provides 
instruction and support for classroom teachers. Aides, assistants, 
or tutors who engage in instructional support are considered to 
be instructional paraprofessionals as defined by ESSA. Individuals 
who work solely in non-instructional roles, such as food service, 
cafeteria or playground supervision, personal care services, and 
non-instructional computer assistance are not considered to be 
instructional paraprofessionals. 
Responsibilities of Instructional Paraprofessionals  
ESEA specifies that instructional paraprofessionals may engage 
in the following activities:  
● Provide one-on-one tutoring for eligible students, if the 
tutoring is scheduled at a time when a student would not 
otherwise receive instruction from a teacher.  
● Assist with classroom management, such as organizing 
instructional and other materials. 
● Assist in a computer laboratory.  
● Provide instructional support in a library or media center.  
● Provide instructional services to students under the direct 
supervision of a teacher. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 4 of 12 
 
All instructional paraprofessionals must be supervised directly by 
teachers. Instructional paraprofessionals cannot be supervised by 
a peer or group of peers.  
The following two categories of paraprofessionals need only 
possess a high school diploma or equivalent and are not required 
to meet the additional requirements listed above: 
● Paraprofessionals in Title I programs who serve primarily as 
translators (as long as these paraprofessionals are proficient 
in English and a language other than English); and  
● Paraprofessionals working solely on parental involvement 
activities. 
Visit the Mass. DESE website for additional details.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Fax: 
617-635-7956 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 5 of 12 
 
ATTACHMENT A 
Massachusetts Department of Education Learning Guidelines 
for Title I Instructional Paraprofessionals 
The Department of Education strongly encourages districts and 
charter schools to use these guidelines as a model for all 
paraprofessionals who provide instructional support to students. 
BASIC ASSUMPTIONS 
● Instructional paraprofessionals are respected team 
members responsible for assisting in the delivery of 
instruction and other student-related activities. As valued 
members of the faculty, they are essential partners in the 
work of Title I programs. 
● Given their responsibilities, instructional paraprofessionals 
must be skilled in reading, writing, and mathematics, and 
familiar with instructional practices that ensure and 
support the achievement of all students. 
● To enhance the continuity and quality of services for 
students, paraprofessionals must be encouraged and 
supported in their efforts to participate in ongoing 
professional development programs. 
● Programs for instructional paraprofessionals are best when 
they are comprehensive, acknowledge the diverse roles 
paraprofessionals play in schools and provide pathways to 
further education and teacher licensure, if desired. 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 6 of 12 
 
1. LITERACY DOMAIN 
01 Language 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Use agreed-upon rules for informal and formal discussions 
in small and large groups 
● Pose questions, listen to the ideas of others, and contribute 
their own information or ideas in group discussions or 
interviews in order to acquire new knowledge 
● Understand new vocabulary and use it correctly in reading 
and writing 
● Analyze and use Standard English grammar 
● Describe, analyze, and use appropriately formal and 
informal English 
● Identify and use the correct meaning of words and phrases 
● Recognize and use words with multiple meanings 
● Use a paragraph or passage as the context for determining 
the meaning of an unfamiliar or uncommon word or phrase 
● Use dictionaries, thesauruses, and other related references 
02 Literature 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Identify the basic facts and main ideas in a text and use 
them as the basis for interpretation  
● Identify and paraphrase the main idea of a passage 
● Identify supporting evidence 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 7 of 12 
 
● Identify, organize, and draw conclusions using the 
relationship(s) among the ideas in written material 
● Identify, analyze, and apply knowledge of the theme, 
structure and elements of fiction and provide evidence 
from the text to support their understanding 
● Identify, analyze, and apply knowledge of the purposes, 
structure, and elements of nonfiction or informational 
materials and provide evidence from the text to support 
their understanding 
● Identify, analyze, and apply knowledge of the themes, 
structure, and elements of poetry and provide evidence 
from the text to support their understanding 
● Identify, analyze, and apply knowledge of the themes, 
structure, and elements of drama and provide evidence 
from the text to support their understanding 
● Identify and analyze how an author’s words appeal to the 
senses, create imagery, suggest mood, and set tone and 
provide evidence from the text to support their 
understanding 
03 Composition 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Write with a clear focus, coherent organization, and 
sufficient detail 
● Write for different audiences and purposes 
● Demonstrate adequate paragraph development and 
appropriate style, tone, and word choice in their 
compositions 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 8 of 12 
 
● Use standard English conventions in their writing, revising, 
and editing 
● Organize ideas in writing in a way that makes sense for 
their purpose 
● Gather information from a variety of sources, analyze, and 
evaluate the quality of the information they obtain, and use 
it to answer their own questions 
● Outline, summarize, and take notes 
● Interpret information presented in graphic form 
2. NUMERACY DOMAIN 
01 Number Sense 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Understand numbers, ways of representing numbers, 
relationships among numbers, and number systems 
● Understand principles and operations related to integers, 
fractions, decimals, percents, ratios, and proportions 
● Understand and solve problems involving integers, 
fractions, decimals, percents, ratios, and proportions 
● Understand meanings of mathematical operations and how 
they relate to one another. 
● Compute fluently and make reasonable estimates 
● Know how to use standard arithmetical algorithms 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 9 of 12 
 
02 Algebra 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Understand and use patterns to model and solve problems 
● Understand how to manipulate and simplify algebraic 
expressions and translate problems into algebraic notation 
● Understand the properties of different types of functions 
and relations 
03 Geometry 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Analyze characteristics and properties of two- and three-
dimensional geometric shapes 
● Specify locations and describe spatial relationships using 
coordinate geometry and other representational systems 
● Understand the principles and properties of coordinate and 
transformational geometry, apply transformations, and use 
symmetry to analyze mathematical situations 
● Use visualization, spatial reasoning, and geometric 
modeling to solve problems. 
04 Measurement and Data Analysis 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Identify measurable attributes of objects and use the 
standard units, systems, and processes of measurement 
● Formulate questions that can be addressed with data; and 
collect, organize, and display relevant data to answer them 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 10 of 12 
 
● Select and use appropriate statistical methods to analyze 
data 
● Develop and evaluate inferences and predictions that are 
based on data 
3. INSTRUCTION DOMAIN 
01 Curriculum Planning 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Assist with activities addressing standards that will advance 
students’ level of content knowledge 
● Assist with activities appropriate for the full range of 
students within a classroom and appropriate to the specific 
discipline, age, and level of proficiency with the English 
language and Individualized Education Programs (IEP) 
02 Effective Instruction 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Communicate lesson objectives clearly  
● Build on students’ prior knowledge and experience 
● Provide support under the guidance of a classroom teacher 
to address student needs 
● Help students use appropriate instructional resources to 
support learning in reading, writing, and mathematics 
● Help students use a variety of approaches to understand 
what they read 
● Help students focus their writing 
● Help students relate mathematics to everyday situations 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 11 of 12 
 
● Employ a variety and range of instructional techniques 
from direct instruction to cooperative learning groups 
● Use instructional technology appropriately 
● Provide regular feedback to students on their progress 
● Provide formal and informal assessment of student 
progress 
03 Classroom Climate and Equity 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Maintain appropriate standards of behavior, mutual 
respect, and safety in the classroom 
● Promote achievement for all students, including those with 
disabilities, those with limited English proficiency, and 
those who are gifted and talented, without exception 
● Promote civic and self-responsibility in the classroom, 
school, and community 
04 Professional Responsibilities 
A paraprofessional will know how and be able to: 
● Carry out their legal and ethical responsibilities. 
● Carry out health, safety, and emergency procedures of the 
learning environment. 
● Maintain high standards and expectations for all students. 
05 Professional Skills 
A paraprofessional will understand how and be able to: 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L02 
Page 12 of 12 
 
● Accept supervision to reflect critically upon their classroom 
experience and identify areas for further skill and 
professional development. 
● Work collaboratively with school personnel. 
● Confer with supervisor(s) and/or content specialist(s) when 
assistance is needed in supporting students’ learning 
process. 


