Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PP05 
Version 01 
 
EMPLOYEE ATTENDANCE  
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Poor attendance adversely affects the work we can accomplish 
and the morale of all Boston Public Schools employees. 
Attendance will be monitored throughout the year at all levels. 
Any excessive absences, tardiness, or perceived abuse of time 
off/leave benefits will be investigated and may subject the 
employee to discipline. The procedures described herein may not 
occur if the superintendent exercises their statutory authority to 
dismiss, demote, or suspend.  
ATTENDANCE MONITORING PROCESS 
1. Sign in/out: Managers1 must establish and supervise a paper 
sign in/out procedure that provides an accurate record of 
the date and time of arrival and departure of all employees 
 
1 The term "manager" refers to positions such as academic 
superintendent, senior officer, headmaster, principal, senior 
program director, and director. A manager may in some cases 
delegate authority to carry out these procedures to supervisory 
personnel reporting to them. 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP05 
Page 2 of 5 
 
assigned to them. Employees must comply with the sign 
in/out process. An employee who fails to comply with the 
procedure, falsifies such a record, and/or fraudulently 
reports their or another’s time will be subject to discipline 
up to and including termination. 
2. Report your absence/early departure: Managers must 
establish a process to report an absence/early departure due 
to illness. Employees must follow the process created and 
implemented by their manager for each absence/early 
departure. If the employee fails to follow the protocol 
established by the manager, the employee’s absence/early 
departure will be unexcused, and the employee will not be 
paid for the day(s)/hour(s) of absence(s). The employee may 
also be subject to discipline up to and including termination. 
a. Employees not serving in schools must follow the 
protocol set by their manager. In the case of early 
departure, the employee must notify their manager 
before leaving the building.  
b. If the employee’s absence is for more than five (5) 
consecutive days, refer to the Absence and Leaves 
circular. Regardless of the duration of the time off due 
to illness, managers may at any time request medical 
documentation from the employee to substantiate 
their absence. 
3. Reasonable accommodations:  An employee seeking 
reasonable accommodations for a disability may contact the 
Office of Equity (617-635-9650) to begin an interactive 
dialogue process. Employees who inform their managers 
about a disability will be referred to the Office of Equity by 
the manager. The district will attempt to provide reasonable 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP05 
Page 3 of 5 
 
accommodations unless it would cause an undue hardship 
or fundamentally alter the district’s programs. Medical 
information concerning any employee will be maintained in 
strict confidence.  
Chapter 151B and the ADA define a person with a disability 
as someone who: (1) has a physical or mental impairment 
that substantially limits one or more major life activities; (2) 
has a record of such an impairment; or (3) is regarded as 
having such an impairment. Major life activities include, but 
are not limited to: caring for one’s self, performing manual 
tasks, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, or learning.  
The person may also qualify for an extended or intermittent 
leave of absence. Please refer to the Absence and Leave 
Policy circular and your collective bargaining agreement or 
conditions of employment for more information.  
For more information about the reasonable 
accommodations process, please see Superintendent’s 
Circular EQT-07. 
PATTERNS OF ABUSE 
When a manager determines that an employee’s absences 
and/or tardiness exhibits a pattern of abuse and/or raises 
concern, the manager will address it directly with the employee 
in the way the manager deems appropriate (i.e., informal 
meeting versus investigatory meeting). The employee will have 
the right to union representation at all types of meetings.  
In the past, the following scenarios have been deemed as 
patterns of abuse (the list is not exhaustive/exclusive): 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP05 
Page 4 of 5 
 
1. 
Four (4) or more separate absences before or after the 
weekend or holiday/vacation 
2. 
Sick absences lasting six (6) or more consecutive days 
without a physician’s certificate 
3. 
Scattered sick days/leave throughout the school year 
exceeding or projected to exceed fifteen (15) or more days 
4. 
Two (2) or more absences, consecutive or closely 
patterned, following layoff notification 
5. 
Two (2) or more absences, consecutive or closely 
patterned, following contract non-renewal notification 
6. 
Two (2) or more absences immediately following poor 
performance evaluation 
7. 
Absence during a previously scheduled investigatory 
meeting 
8. 
Absence after receiving a notice of an investigatory 
meeting 
9. 
Absence on day of release or scheduled release of poor 
performance evaluation 
10. 
Patterns of two (2) days out, two in, one out, etc. 
11. 
Tardiness: two (2) or more days within a one-week period 
12. 
Tardiness: two (2) or more days within a two-week period 
CONSEQUENCES FOR ABUSE AND/OR EXCESSIVE 
ABSENTEEISM/TARDINESS: 
The following are the consequences an employee will face when 
they have been deemed to engage in a pattern of abuse and/or 
excessive absenteeism/tardiness. These consequences can be 
applied individually or in conjunction with one another.  
1. 
Discipline up to and including termination 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP05 
Page 5 of 5 
 
2. 
Requirement to provide medical documentation 
substantiating each absence (past, present, and future) 
3. 
No pay for time out of work if the employee fails to 
provide requested medical documentation for absences; 
the absences will be unexcused. 
4. 
Issuance of an “unsatisfactory/does not meet standards” 
rating on the employee's performance evaluation 
attendance/punctuality standard. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Employee Services 
Department: 
Human resources 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
E-mail: 
OHCLeaves@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


