Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular  
NUMBER: 
HRS-HS02  
Version 01 
  
 
  
JOB SHARING FOR PERMANENT TEACHERS AND 
PARAPROFESSIONALS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The Office of Human Resources accepts job-sharing applications 
through the online forms included in this circular. Please note 
that employees will be required to sign in with their Boston 
Public Schools Gmail account. These links will also be made 
available through BTU and paraprofessional representatives, the 
Boston Public Schools website, and the Superintendent’s 
Bulletin. 
Boston Public Schools has agreed to provide job-sharing 
opportunities to permanent educators (1) and paraprofessionals 
who desire to split a position with another staff member in their 
building. 
CONDITIONS FOR JOB SHARING 
The following are the conditions under which employees are 
permitted to share jobs: 
 
1() This includes nurses, COSE, and other BTU educators with 
permanent status. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS02 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
 
1. Participation in job sharing requires approval by the 
principal//head of school. The principal/head of school 
should submit their approval to the Office of Human 
Resources via the online form below.  
2. All participants in the job-sharing program will be required 
to jointly plan their program so as to provide programmatic 
integrity and continuity. The principal/head of school must 
approve such plans.  
With the approval of the principal/head of school, teachers 
or paraprofessionals may structure their program in the 
following two options: 
a. Both teach for one-half day 
b. Both teach for one-half week 
► Job share participants may not split the school year 
with their job share partner in order to work for only 
half of the school year. Job share participants also 
may not split the teaching bimonthly or biweekly.  
3. All participants in the job-sharing program will be required 
to attend all "Early Release Time" in-service meetings, all 
professional days, and parent conferences. If the job share 
takes place in a designated Extended Learning Time school, 
both teachers/paraprofessionals are expected to participate 
in ELT. 
4. The two teachers participating in a joint assignment/job 
sharing will meet with one another once each marking 
period, at the discretion of the principal/head of school, to 
assess and improve the job sharing program. These 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS02 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
 
meetings may be held on early release or professional 
development days. 
All parties recognize that at times it may be necessary for 
the two teachers and the principal/head of school to meet 
for the purpose of addressing problems which may arise in 
the implementation of job sharing at an individual school. 
Such meetings, if necessary, shall be scheduled at a time 
that is mutually agreeable to all parties. 
5. Teachers and paraprofessionals participating in the job-
sharing program will receive the following compensation 
and benefits: 
a. Compensation shall be one-half of salary entitlement. 
b. Sick leave shall be one-half of annual entitlement. 
c. Personal days shall be one-half of annual entitlement. 
d. Health insurance premium and health and welfare fund: 
full contribution 
e. Seniority accrual: full credit 
f. Attachment rights for one-year to former position 
6. Teachers participating in job-sharing must hold a valid DESE 
license for the position. No exceptions will be made.  
7. Each participant in the job-sharing program will be asked to 
enter into a binding agreement committing to the year-long 
assignment. 
8. Participants must submit new job-sharing applications each 
year. Continuation of a job-sharing pairing for the next 
academic school year will be subject to a favorable review 
by all parties. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS02 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
 
TO INDICATE INTEREST IN JOB SHARING 
Permanent teachers or paraprofessionals who wish to indicate 
their interest in job sharing should submit a request using the 
online form shown below. The submission of an application only 
serves an indication of interest and is not binding. The application 
must be submitted via the online form no later than 5:00 p.m. on 
March 25, 2025. 
Please note: Applicants are responsible for making all job-sharing 
arrangements, including finding a colleague with whom to job-
share. The Office of Human Resources does not assist with 
making job-sharing arrangements. If you are unable to find a 
partner, your request to job share will be denied. 
2024-25 ONLINE FORMS 
The Office of Human Resources now accepts job-sharing 
applications online. Candidate applications for job share as well 
as principal/head of school approval can be submitted through 
the links below. Please note that employees will be required to 
sign in with their Boston Public Schools Gmail account. These 
links will also be made available through BTU and 
paraprofessional representatives, the Boston Public Schools 
website, and the Superintendent’s Bulletin.  
Job Sharing Request: 
Applicant Form 
Each applicant interested in Job Sharing 
must submit their own form by March 
25, 2025. Principals/heads of schools 
must submit the form below for 
approval. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS02 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
 
Job Sharing Request: 
Principal Approval 
Form 
Principals/heads of schools must submit 
this form to approve a job share request 
by April 15, 2025.  
 
FOR MORE INFORMATION ABOUT JOB SHARING 
There will be an informal meeting at the Boston Teachers Union 
in Winter 2025 for teachers and paraprofessionals who are 
interested in obtaining more information about job sharing.  
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
School-Based Staffing 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources  
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington St., Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Additional 
Questions: 
Please submit an HR Inquiry Ticket via 
the Beacon. This can be found on Access 
Boston. 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


