Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
HRS-PP07 
Version 01 
 
 
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION PROCEDURES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
OBJECTIVE 
The Boston Public Schools Workers’ Compensation Service is 
located within Boston City Hall, 6th Floor, Room 613. Workers’ 
Compensation Service administers benefits for city workers, 
including Boston Public Schools employees. The Workers’ 
Compensation Service strives to ensure effective and efficient 
delivery of benefits and collects injury data for state and federal 
reporting requirements. 
ADMINISTERING WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BENEFITS 
For the City of Boston Workers’ Compensation Service to provide 
adequate service, it is imperative that all work-related injuries be 
reported as soon as possible, preferably within twenty-four hours 
of the occurrence. 
For the Workers’ Compensation Service to provide timely 
benefits, your cooperation in obtaining medical documentation is 
critical. If a case is reported late, or if the Workers’ Compensation 
Service does not have sufficient medical documentation, the 
employee’s receipt of benefits may be delayed. 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP07 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
► It is the employee’s responsibility to request complete 
medical treatment records for the work-related injury 
and provide them or have them sent to the Workers’ 
Compensation Service. Out-of-work notes are NOT 
sufficient to maintain workers’ compensation benefits. 
Incomplete or late reports of injury could also subject Boston 
Public Schools to financial penalties. 
● To find the City’s accident report form, as well as a 
complete guide to the city’s workers’ compensation 
process, please see the City of Boston Workers’ 
Compensation Service employee guide at 
https://www.boston.gov/departments/human-
resources/workers-compensation-process.  
● The accident report can be accessed directly at 
https://www.boston.gov/sites/default/files/file/2022/02/
accident-report-form_2-7-2022.pdf.  
STEPS TO TAKE IF YOU HAVE BEEN INJURED IN THE COURSE OF 
YOUR EMPLOYMENT 
If emergency services (i.e., life threatening, bleeding, head 
injuries, severe fractures, etc.) are necessary:  
1. Seek out emergency care (via ambulance if necessary) at 
the closest emergency care facility to where you were 
injured. 
2. Fill out and sign the accident report form. Submit it to the 
workers’ compensation office and your supervisor or human 
resources representative in your department. If you are 
unable to fill it out, you can have someone else fill it out for 
you. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP07 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
3. Medical documentation must be sent to Workers’ 
Compensation Services (Room 613).  
4. A supervisor’s signature is requested solely for the purpose 
of notification that an injury occurred. A supervisor’s 
signature does not indicate that the supervisor 
agrees/disagrees with the report, nor does it indicate the 
supervisor witnessed the accident. 
5. Reasonable and necessary medical expenses for accepted 
work-related injuries will be covered by Workers’ 
Compensation Service, regardless of whether time has been 
lost due to the injury. However, salary replacement benefits 
for accepted work-related injuries are given only if the 
employee lost 5 days or more. Substantial medical 
documentation is required for employees who have lost 5 
days or more. 
6. A representative from Workers’ Compensation will contact 
you to follow up on your injury. They will also explain your 
benefits and discuss your medical treatment. If you haven’t 
heard back within seven (7) days of reporting your injury, 
you can speak with a case manager by calling 617-635-3193 
or emailing workerscompstaff@boston.gov. 
 WHILE ON WORKERS’ COMPENSATION 
While on workers’ compensation, the employee must maintain 
an approved leave of absence status with the Office of Human 
resources by applying for a leave of absence on the HUB and 
providing a WH-380-E form or medical 
certification/documentation on official letterhead from a health 
care provider. For more information on leaves of absence, please 
see Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP07 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
While on workers’ compensation, the employee is permitted to 
use available sick, personal, or vacation time to supplement the 
difference in workers’ compensation earnings to continue to 
receive 100% of their normal earnings. This applies to employees 
who have available time and have completed the Workers' 
Compensation Earnings Consent Form, allowing the use of 
earned time. Without consent, the Office of Human resources will 
not supplement your workers’ compensation earnings. The 
consent form can be accessed directly at: 
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSf0E_fnOzpBy2kNdqn
HyXIvlVzzziCmSsIE0pM74H4kMoCwow/viewform.  
Supplementing your WC earnings allows employees to maintain 
their normal deductions (retirement, union dues, health 
insurance, etc.). For some unions, it also minimizes the impact of 
earnings that are normally paid over the summer. To be sure of 
the financial impact that supplementing (or not supplementing) 
your WC earnings will have your pay once you return to work, 
please reach out to the BPS Payroll team at 617-635-9460. 
Employees are permitted up to 1 year of leave for an injury related 
to an approved Workers’ Compensation injury. Employees who 
are absent more than 1 year may have an essential functions 
meeting held to determine whether they are able to continue 
their employment with BPS. 
EMPLOYEE RETURNING TO WORK 
An employee who is ready to return to work after having been 
out due to a work-related injury must have medical clearance 
from their doctor. Before returning to work, the employee must 
provide copies of the medical clearance note to both OHR and 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP07 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
the Workers’ Compensation Service and inform both offices of 
their intent to return and the intended date. The clearance note 
should be emailed to OHRLeaves@bostonpublicschools.org as 
well as workerscompstaff@boston.gov.  
Transitional modified work may be offered by the Boston Public 
Schools to employees who have been injured on the job and can 
return to work on a modified basis. The Boston Public Schools 
makes reasonable accommodations in compliance with the ADA 
and M.G.L. c. 151B for employees with handicaps or disabilities, as 
outlined in Superintendent's Circular EQT-01. If you wish to seek 
reasonable accommodations, please contact the Office of Equity 
at 617-635-9650 or accommodations@bostonpublicschools.org to 
engage in an interactive dialogue prior to your return.  
The goals of the Workers’ Compensation office are to ensure that 
eligible injured employees receive quality and timely medical 
services, receive timely benefits, and return to the job as quickly 
as possible. Your case manager will remain in constant contact 
with you, and you will be required to maintain contact and 
provide the necessary medical information to your case manager 
so that these goals can be achieved. 
All accident reports regarding an employee’s injury should be 
forwarded to Workers’ Compensation Services (address at the 
bottom of this circular). 
Any additional information or questions can be forwarded to the 
employee’s case manager. Case managers are assigned based on 
the employee’s last name. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP07 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
MEDICAL TREATMENT INFORMATION FOR ALL EMPLOYEES 
REGARDING WORKERS’ COMPENSATION  
If you need medical care for your work injury or illness, contact a 
medical provider. Let them know that you are seeking workers’ 
compensation coverage for the treatment. The city currently 
does not have any preferred medical providers. 
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION CHECKLIST 
As this circular is comprehensive, and to prevent delays in 
processing, please ensure that you have completed the following 
action items when applying for/returning from workers' 
compensation. 
APPLYING FOR WORKERS’ COMPENSATION 
● Complete and submit the Report of Occupational Injury or 
Accident. This report should be verified and signed by your 
supervisor. 
● Review Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP13 Absence and 
Leave Policy. 
● Complete a leave of absence application form and submit 
WH-380-E form or physician’s certificate.  
● Send medical updates to both the City of Boston Workers’ 
Compensation Unit and the Office of Human resources to 
maintain your leave of absence and workers' compensation 
benefits.  
● If applicable, complete the workers' compensation 
supplemental earnings consent form if you wish to 
supplement your benefit with accrued time. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP07 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
RETURNING FROM WORKERS’ COMPENSATION 
● Send both Human resources and City of Boston Workers' 
Compensation Unit medical documentation certifying the 
ability to return to work with/without restrictions. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Department: 
Workers’ Compensation Service  
Mailing Address: 
Boston City Hall, Room 613, Boston, MA 02201 
Phone: 
617-635-3193 
Fax: 
617-635-3119 
 
For submitting forms to the Office of Human resources: 
Owner: 
Employee Services 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources  
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9255 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
OHRleaves@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


