Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PM07 
Version 01 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF CLASSROOM 
PARAPROFESSIONALS 
EMPLOYEES COVERED BY THIS CIRCULAR: 
● Coverage Paraprofessional  
● Instructional Paraprofessional 
● One-to-One Paraprofessional 
● Surround Care Paraprofessional 
FORMAL EVALUATION 
All staff shall be formally evaluated using standards and 
indicators reasonably related to a paraprofessional performance, 
with a mark for each standard and an overall rating.  Overall 
ratings shall be “Exemplary,” “Proficient,” “Needs Improvement,” 
and “Unsatisfactory,” and shall be transmitted to 
paraprofessionals by the last business day prior to May 15 via the 
VectorEvals platform. A paraprofessional may sign the evaluation 
digitally only if the paraprofessional does so on a BPS-issued 
computer. If the paraprofessional does not have access to a BPS-
issued computer, the form must be printed from VectorEvals for 
their signature and then uploaded as a PDF attachment to the 
digital form. 
Paraprofessionals will generally be evaluated formally every two 
years, except as set forth in section (7) of Schedule, Meetings, and 
Procedures below.  During each school year, each principal/head 
of school or their designee will identify approximately one-half of 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07 
Page 2 of 8 
 
the staff for which that administrator is responsible for evaluating 
during that year.  The process of identifying the evaluees will be 
determined by the responsible administrator.  An administrator 
may also evaluate a staff member not originally identified if 
assistance, supervision, or intervention is deemed appropriate 
based on informal observation. 
EVALUATORS 
1. No supervisor shall supervise or evaluate a relative. 
2. the head of school, principal, or other administrative head 
outside of the bargaining unit will be responsible for all 
evaluations.  However, they may be assisted by other 
qualified persons (who are not members of the bargaining 
unit) designated by the School Department. 
SCHEDULE, MEETINGS, AND PROCEDURES 
1. At the beginning of each school year, the responsible 
building administrator or their designee shall meet with 
paraprofessionals for the purpose of explaining the 
evaluation program and instrument and answering 
questions.  The building administrator may be assisted by 
other qualified persons designated by the School 
Department.  Classroom visits may be a combination of 
announced and unannounced observations. 
For any classroom visit resulting in written feedback 
indicating a deficiency in the paraprofessional’s practice, the 
responsible supervisor shall provide such written feedback 
to the paraprofessional before releasing the next formative 
or summative evaluation. 
2. If a paraprofessional’s performance results in an overall 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07 
Page 3 of 8 
 
Formative Evaluation or Summative Evaluation rating of 
“Needs Improvement” or “Unsatisfactory,” the evaluation 
prescription may contain a requirement that the 
paraprofessional take advantage of additional professional 
development training or other opportunities offered by or 
through the School Department to correct a weakness or 
deficiency which caused the less than proficient rating. 
Formative refers to evaluations that at a minimum are 
twenty (20) school days apart. 
Regardless of the rating mark, within ten (10) school days 
following the last observation used as the basis of the 
evaluation, the responsible building administrator (or 
designee) shall meet with the paraprofessional to discuss 
the evaluation.  At this meeting, the paraprofessional will be 
given two (2) copies of the written evaluation, signed, and 
dated by the responsible building administrator.  
The paraprofessional shall sign and return one (1) copy to 
indicate having received it, but not to indicate agreement or 
disagreement.  No paraprofessional shall be asked to sign an 
incomplete evaluation form.  Paraprofessionals shall be 
allowed to attach their written comments to the evaluation 
form.  A paraprofessional whose overall performance is 
determined less than “Proficient” at any point during the 
school year shall be notified in writing and shall meet 
directly with the responsible building administrator. 
 
3. In any area where the responsible building administrator or 
their designee indicates a need for improvement, they will 
provide the paraprofessional with a written prescription.  
The paraprofessional may attach comments to the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07 
Page 4 of 8 
 
prescription.      
If the paraprofessional continues to need improvement after 
allowing adequate time to improve, the responsible 
administrator may include a prescription in the evaluation 
that the paraprofessional may voluntarily take the 
opportunity of additional training or in-service training to 
correct a deficiency.  
4. If a paraprofessional receives an “Unsatisfactory” on at least 
four (4) formative evaluations within a twelve (12) month 
period in which the paraprofessional reported to work, or on 
at least two (2) formative evaluations plus a summative 
evaluation, the principal/head of school may initiate 
termination by recommending to the superintendent that 
the paraprofessional be terminated. If the superintendent 
approves the head of school’s/principal’s recommendation, 
the principal/head of school shall notify the paraprofessional 
in writing of their intent to dismiss the paraprofessional. The 
paraprofessional may then request a meeting with the 
principal/head of school to discuss their intent to dismiss. 
This request must be made in writing within ten (10) days of 
the paraprofessional’s receipt of the intent to dismiss notice. 
Overall “Unsatisfactory” evaluation ratings need not occur in 
consecutive months. 
An overall rating of “Unsatisfactory” on a summative 
evaluation must be preceded by a rating of “Unsatisfactory” 
on at least two (2) formative evaluations during that school 
year. A paraprofessional may be removed from the 
classroom, dismissed, or suspended for just cause prior to 
the completion of the prescriptive period specified in this 
paragraph.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07 
Page 5 of 8 
 
5. After each of the first three (3) formative evaluation overall 
“Unsatisfactory” ratings that are based in whole or in part 
upon classroom performance, the responsible building 
administrator shall conduct a follow-up evaluation.  This 
evaluation shall include observation of classroom 
performance and take place no sooner than twenty (20) 
school days and no later than fifty (50) school days after the 
previous “Unsatisfactory” evaluation.  
If an overall formative evaluation “Unsatisfactory” rating is 
based upon grounds other than classroom performance, 
then the responsible administrator must clearly convey the 
reasons in writing to the paraprofessional and follow 
prescribed procedures for progressive discipline.  
6. A formative or summative evaluation with an overall 
“Unsatisfactory” rating shall be maintained as a permanent 
part of the employee’s personnel record and may be grieved 
and arbitrated. An employee may grieve a summative 
evaluation with an overall rating other than “Unsatisfactory” 
up to but not beyond the level of the Step 2 hearing officer, 
who shall have the authority to rectify the grievance. Any 
such grievance shall be dealt with expeditiously.  In the 
event of a concurrent dismissal, the grievances shall be 
merged and treated as a single grievance. 
 
Notwithstanding the above, disputes concerning the 
paraprofessional's rating in any of the individual standards 
found within a formative or summative evaluation not 
resulting in an overall "Unsatisfactory" rating are neither 
grievable nor arbitrable. Similarly, disputes concerning 
comments made by the responsible administrator within an 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07 
Page 6 of 8 
 
observation or formative and summative evaluation are 
neither grievable nor arbitrable. 
7. The following individuals shall be evaluated annually by the 
last business day prior to November 15 if possible: 
a. Paraprofessionals who were evaluated during the 
previous school year as “Unsatisfactory” overall or in a 
particular area. 
b. All paraprofessionals who are new to the building. 
 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07 
Page 7 of 8 
 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Date 
Activity 
By the last business day 
prior to November 15 
● Evaluation of paraprofessionals who 
received an “Unsatisfactory” in their 
evaluation from the prior school year. 
● Evaluation p who are new to the school 
building. 
By the last business day 
prior to May 15  
● Deadline to submit evaluation on 
VectorEvals platform.  
A paraprofessional may sign the 
evaluation digitally only if the 
paraprofessional does so on a BPS-
issued computer. If the 
paraprofessional does not, the form 
must be printed from VectorEvals for 
them to sign and then uploaded as a 
PDF attachment to the digital form.  
● Evaluation of paraprofessionals due 
every 2 years (except for 
paraprofessionals new to the building 
or who received an “Unsatisfactory” 
rating the previous school year). 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PM07 
Page 8 of 8 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Evaluation and Performance 
Management 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 4th Floor, Boston, 
MA 02119 
 
 
Email: 
eval@bostonpublicschools.org 
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
► Click to view a SAMPLE Classroom Paraprofessional 
Evaluation Form (PDF). Evaluators should use VectorEvals to 
submit their evaluations. 
 
 
 


