Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PP01  
Version 01 
 
CONTRACTUAL BENEFITS: CAREER AWARDS, SALARY 
LANES, SALARY STEPS, ACADEMIC LADDER CREDITS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Boston Public Schools offer numerous contractual benefits such 
as career awards and salary lane increases based on the 
completion of accredited coursework, degrees, academic ladder 
credits, and continuing education units. To receive these benefits, 
employees must submit the appropriate documentation 
(described below) to the Office of Human Capital. Once their 
documentation is submitted, employees will receive confirmation 
via email, within 4 to 6 weeks, except during peak seasons. 
1. CAREER AWARDS 
Career awards are issued monthly by anniversary date, based on 
a monthly reporting cycle in the Office of Human Capital, and 
vary by union affiliation. PS03s are no longer needed to initiate 
this process, except for BASAS members, who are required to 
submit a request via PS03. If an award is not received, the 
employee should then submit a PS03 to the Office of Human 
Capital to address the issue: 
• In the “Pay Adjustment” category, place a checkmark in the 
career award block and specify the career award requested. 
• Indicate initial date of employment. 
• Sign and date the “Originator’s signature/date” block.  


Page 2:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 2 of 12 
 
Career awards are effective on an employee's anniversary date. 
Employees will see their career award reflected within 2-3 pay 
periods. Denied applicants will receive an email from the Office of 
Human Capital (to the employee’s bostonpublicschools.org email 
address) providing the reason for the denial. 
Paraprofessionals: Career awards are awarded by the number of 
working days completed, not (wholly) by academic year 
completed. The schedule of awards is as follows: 
Step 
Length of Service 
2 
3 Years 
3 
6 Years 
4 
9 Years 
5 
12 Years 
Career Award 
1,800 Paraprofessional Seniority Days 
Career Award 
2,800 Paraprofessional Seniority Days 
Career Award 
3,800 Paraprofessional Seniority Days 
Career Award 
4,800 Paraprofessional Seniority Days 
Career Award 
5,800 Paraprofessional Seniority Days 
 
BTU: Career Awards are awarded at the completion of the 
threshold year, for the start of the next academic year. 
All other collective bargaining units: Career awards are awarded 
on an employee’s anniversary date based on a monthly reporting 
cycle. 
2. SALARY LANES 
Employees who qualify by contract for a change in salary lane as 


Page 3:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 3 of 12 
 
a result of the completion of accredited course work and degrees 
must submit a PS-03 to receive this benefit.  Lane changes are 
not made automatically. 
• In the “Pay Adjustment” category, place a checkmark in the 
salary lane block and specify the salary lane requested. 
• Attach official original transcripts documenting accredited 
courses and/or degree completion. Transcripts for 
accredited graduate coursework must include a passing 
grade and/or a degree conferred date for acceptance. 
Electronic transcripts must be sent directly from the 
institution to EmployeeServices@BostonPublicSchools.org. 
Boston Public Schools In-Service and Academic Ladder 
certificate(s) must be printed. An In-service/Academic 
Ladder transcript summary is not acceptable.  
• Sign and date the “Originator’s signature/date” block. 
➢ Employees should only submit credits/degrees when 
applying for salary lane advancement; employees 
should not submit single or multiple credits below the 
threshold for lane advancement.   
Approved applicants can expect to see a change in their salary 
within 3-4 pay periods following submission of a salary lane 
application. Denied applicants will receive an email from the 
Office of Human Capital (to the employee’s 
bostonpublicschools.org email address) providing the reason for 
the denial. Please note that this process will take longer in the 
summer months (June – September). 
Salary lane changes will be processed retroactively to September 
1 if the application is received in the Office of Human Capital by 
the close of business on September 30. Otherwise, the change 
will be effective on the first day of the month following complete 


Page 4:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 4 of 12 
 
submission of all documentation during the school year. 
Submissions after May 31 will be effective for the start of the 
following school year. 
Note: Boston Public Schools reserves the right to approve salary 
lane advancement for only those courses that are related to the 
field of education or enhance advancement up the educational 
career ladder. Requests for pre-approval of any courses shall be 
responded to by the Office of Human Capital promptly. Courses 
must meet the following criteria: 
Accredited College or University Courses 
1. Courses must be granted by an accredited college or 
university listed on the Accredited Institutions of Post-
Secondary Education registry and deemed acceptable by 
the American Council on Education. 
2. Courses must award graduate credit.  If the transcript does 
not clearly state the course is at graduate level, then the 
applicant must supply a letter from the institution verifying 
the course is offered for graduate credit.  Note: for 
paraprofessionals, undergraduate credit and in-service 
credits are acceptable for salary lane advancement, up to a 
bachelor’s degree. 
3. Courses are evaluated by the semester hour only. Courses 
taken by the quarter credit hour will be converted by the 
metric specified by the respective institution. If a conversion 
rate is not specified, Boston Public Schools will use a .75 to 
1.0 ratio.  
4. Courses must clearly relate to the field of education in the 
Boston Public Schools. 


Page 5:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 5 of 12 
 
Academic Ladder Credit 
An Academic Ladder Credit, also known as an “ALC”, is a new 
“credit” for academic lane advancement. ALCs are equal in value 
to in-service credits, with no cap on the amount one can earn.  
Each ALC course has a clearly articulated target competency and 
a range of options for demonstrating this competency through 
artifacts or reflections. ALCs require approximately 12 hours of 
“seat time” per credit. Credit will not be awarded until the 
educator submits a final product demonstrating successful 
implementation of a specific instructional practice. Options for 
demonstrating may include lesson or unit plans, videos, student 
work analyses, reflections, or some combination of these.  
Employees should only submit ALC credits/degrees when 
applying for salary lane advancement. When doing so, employees 
should submit the actual ALC completion certificate from Vector. 
Only ALCs approved by the Boston Public Schools will be 
awarded credit for salary. 
Available ALC courses can be found on Vector. Additionally, a list 
of frequently asked questions can be found in APPENDIX A. 
In-Service Courses  
Course credit may be granted for courses previously offered by 
the Boston Public Schools. Only courses approved by the Boston 
Public Schools will be awarded credit for salary purposes. 
Employees should submit the actual in-service completion 
certificate, available on Vector. The transcript summary is not 
accepted. Please note that no more than 30 in-service credits 
may be used for lane advancement during each employee’s 
lifetime career with Boston Public Schools. 


Page 6:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 6 of 12 
 
Continuing Education Units (CEUs) 
CEUs, also known as contact hours, are accepted at the rate of 15 
contact hours for 1 graduate credit, not to exceed 30 graduate 
credits. Please note that .1 CEU is the equivalent of 1 contact hour. 
This applies to nurses, speech and language pathologists, school 
psychologists, social workers, adjustment counselors, guidance 
counselors, occupational and physical therapists, vision teachers, 
and lead sign language interpreters only. CEUs are only accepted 
from approved CEU providers. The Boston Public Schools is not 
an approved CEU provider. 
Professional Development Points (PDPs) 
Although professional development points may be awarded for 
the completion of in-service courses, they are not applicable for 
salary lane advancement. PDPs are most used as evidence 
toward maintaining professional licensure. 
3. SALARY STEPS 
Salary step increases are automatically awarded based on the 
date specified in the applicable collective bargaining agreement. 
An employee who believes that they are being compensated on 
an incorrect step of the salary schedule should submit a PS-03 to 
the Office of Human Capital, as follows: 
 
 


Page 7:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 7 of 12 
 
• In the “Pay Adjustment” category, place a checkmark in the 
salary step block and specify the salary step requested. 
• Include a brief explanation for the request in the “Additional 
Explanation” section. 
• Sign and date the “Originator’s signature/date” block. 
Salary Steps as Related to Inside and Outside Service 
There is no longer a cap on the amount of Inside Service credits 
available for salary step adjustments/placement. Instead, the 
credit is based on prior eligible years of service. To qualify, an 
employee must have worked a minimum of 120 days in a 
qualifying academic year. 
A maximum of three years is awarded for an outside service 
salary step adjustment. To qualify, an employee must provide 
original documentation from a previous employer, specifically 
certifying the named employee has completed a minimum of 160 
days in the appropriate licensed capacity for each year. 
Individuals should not knowingly falsify information and should 
understand that applications are signed under the pains and 
penalties of perjury. 
As salary lane and salary step advancements are contractual 
entitlements, employees should forward these PS-03 requests 
directly to the Office of Human Capital.  No further signatures are 
necessary. 
 
 


Page 8:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 8 of 12 
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
May 31 
Academic year deadline for salary lane changes 
to be processed effective in the same year. 
June, July & 
August 
Submissions effective for the start of the next 
school year. 
September 30 
 
Deadline for submitting salary lane changes to 
be processed retroactively to September 1. 
 
4. NATIONAL BOARD-CERTIFIED TEACHERS 
When you achieve or renew National Board Certification, please 
submit the official notification letter and a PS03 Form.  The Office 
of Human Capital will review and verify the candidate's successful 
completion of board certification, inception and expiration dates 
via the NBPTS website.  The National Board differential is 
effective on the 1st of the month following an eligible 
submission.  Recertifications will be effective on the renewal date 
as long as the request is received prior to the expiration date.  If 
recertification received after the original expiration date the 
renewal will be dated for the first of the month following receipt.  
 
 
 


Page 9:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 9 of 12 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Employee Services 
Department: 
Office of Human Capital 
Mailing Address: Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Fax: 
617-635-7957 
Email: 
employeeservices@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 


Page 10:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 10 of 12 
 
APPENDIX A 
Academic Ladder Credits: Frequently Asked Questions 
• What is an Academic Ladder Credit (ALC), and how does it 
differ from an in-service credit? 
An Academic Ladder Credit, also known as ALC, is a new 
“credit” for academic lane advancement. ALCs are equal in 
value to in-service credits, with no cap on the amount one 
can earn.  ALCs require approximately 12 hours of “seat time” 
per credit, but credit is not awarded until the educator 
submits a final product demonstrating successful 
implementation of a specific instructional practice.  
• What do I need to do to earn ALCs? 
ALCs are earned by demonstrating competence in the 
practices learned in the course. While courses are 
approximately 12 hours of instruction (in person or online), 
credits are not awarded simply for attendance and 
participation. Each ALC course will have a clearly articulated 
target competency and a range of options for 
demonstrating it through artifacts or reflections.  
• What kinds of options might be available for 
demonstrating competencies? 
Each course will be different, but options include: lesson or 
unit plans, videos, student work analyses, reflections, or 
some combination of these. 
• Who determines whether I have demonstrated a 
competency? 
A team of BTU educators and central office administrators 


Page 11:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 11 of 12 
 
will review product submissions and award credits using a 
rubric made available to all course participants.  Those who 
do not earn credits on their first submission will receive 
feedback and an opportunity to resubmit.  
• Am I eligible to take any ALC course I want? 
While any educator is technically able to apply for any ALC 
course, because earning an ALC requires demonstrating 
competence in a skill, it will be difficult to complete courses 
that are not relevant to your context. OHC or APL reserves 
the right to refuse admittance to those educators for whom 
the content may not be relevant.  
• Is there a limit to the number of ALCs I can receive in a year 
or over my career? 
No. ALCs are not subject to the same cap as in-service 
credits. 
• Can you use ALCs in combination with graduate credits, 
etc. towards advancement? 
Yes. Employees may use combinations of graduate credits, 
in-service credits and ALCs for lane advancement. However, 
a teacher must possess a master’s degree to advance to the 
master’s lanes and must possess a doctorate degree to 
advance to the doctorate lane. 
• How do I submit my ALC credits to the Office of Human 
Capital for credit toward lane advancement? 
Employees should only submit ALC credits/degrees when 
applying for salary lane advancement. When doing so, 
employees should submit the actual ALC completion 


Page 12:
 
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP01 
Page 12 of 12 
 
certificate from TeachPoint, along with any other graduate 
or in-service credits, and a completed PS03 to the Office of 
Human Capital (4th Floor, Bolling Building). Only ALCs 
approved by the Boston Public Schools will be awarded 
credit for salary. 
• Are ALC courses portable outside BPS? 
No. 
• Are non-BTU members eligible to earn ALCs? 
While non-BTU members may participate in ALC courses, 
only BTU members are eligible to receive credits. 
• Are paraprofessionals eligible to receive ALCs? 
Yes. Please note that because earning an ALC requires 
demonstrating competence in a skill, it will be difficult to 
complete courses that are not relevant to your role or 
context. OHC or APL reserves the right to refuse admittance 
to those educators for whom the content may not be 
relevant. 
• I have an idea for an ALC course. How can I make that 
happen? 
Contact the Office of Academics and Professional Learning. 
 


