Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
HRS-PP06 
Version 01 
 
 
CONFIDENTIALITY OF PERSONNEL RECORDS AND 
EMPLOYMENT VERIFICATIONS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
State laws and regulations regulate disclosure of information 
collected about personnel by the Boston Public Schools. These 
laws and regulations provide that, with some exceptions such as 
personnel and medical records, the School Department's records 
must be available for public inspection. State law further provides 
that individuals may review and challenge information in the files 
concerning them. 
PERSONNEL RECORDS 
The Office of Human resources maintains both publicly available 
and confidential files about each employee. The Office of Human 
resources will disclose allowable information when requested to 
do so in writing.  
Please note that the following are public records, which will be 
released upon receipt of a written request: 
● Names  
● Other materials or data relating to a specifically named 
individual, the release of which would not publicize intimate 
details of a highly personal nature.   


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP06 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
 
Confidential information is not released, such as social security 
numbers, home addresses and phone numbers, transcripts, 
medical forms, and evaluations.  
Only an employee may view their entire file unless a court order 
or other legal mandates require otherwise. An employee may 
view their file in the Office of Human resources by appointment 
only. To schedule an appointment, place an HR Inquiry request 
via the Beacon. This can be found for internal employees by 
navigating to Access.Boston.gov. 
To obtain a copy of your personnel card for the City of Boston 
Retirement Board, please place an HR inquiry request via the 
Beacon. This can be found for internal employees by navigating 
to Access.Boston.gov. Any former employee will need to submit a 
request via email at ohr@bostonpublicschools.org. 
EMPLOYMENT VERIFICATION 
All inquiries regarding employees, employment status, and other 
such information must be directed to the Office of Human 
resources, where official personnel records are maintained.  
If an employee is seeking employment verification (mortgage, 
housing, substitute time, standard verification, etc.), they should 
create an HR Inquiry request via Beacon. An employee must scan 
and attach the verification to the HR Inquiry submission.  If an 
employee needs an email address to submit to their potential 
mortgage company, housing office or any other loan provider, 
they should provide the OHR email ohr@bostonpublicschools.org 
or fax a request to 617-635-7957. Please note that requests for 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP06 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
employment verification are processed in the order they are 
received and take between 5 and 10 business days to complete. If 
salary/payroll information is needed, it can take longer than 5-10 
business days. Please plan accordingly. 
Any subpoenas for records should be directed to the Office of the 
Legal Advisor, 2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119.  
LICENSURE RELATED EMPLOYMENT VERIFICATIONS 
All educators and other employees seeking licensure related 
verification must complete the BPS Educator Licensure 
Verification Requests form. 
For loan forgiveness requests, please submit an HR Inquiry with 
forms attached on the Beacon via Access.Boston.gov. All former 
employees must email ohr@bostonpublicschools.org and include 
any supporting documentation. 
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP06 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Shared Services 
Department: 
Office of Human resources 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Fax: 
617-635-7956 
Additional 
Questions: 
For additional questions, please submit an HR 
Inquiry Ticket via the Beacon. This can be 
found on Access Boston (access.boston.gov). 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


