Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-HS07.1 
Version 01 
 
QUALIFICATIONS FOR ADDITIONAL PROGRAM AREAS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded by a 
subsequent version. 
Permanent teachers in Boston Public Schools may choose to 
apply for additional program areas. These are non-primary 
subject area(s) in which a teacher currently holds license(s). 
QUALIFICATIONS FOR ADDITIONAL PROGRAM AREAS 
To be deemed qualified in program areas other than the 
"primary" subject area in which a teacher is currently teaching, a 
teacher must hold a valid license in the subject area. The Office of 
Human Resources will verify licensure with the Massachusetts 
Department of Education. Re-licensure does not meet this 
criterion. 
In addition to holding a valid license in the subject area, the 
employee must satisfy at least one of the criteria below: 
1. The Massachusetts State license is not more than five (5) 
years old. 
2. A mean score on the Praxis Exam, not more than ten (10) 
years old. 
3. Fifteen (15) course credits, graduate or undergraduate, 
approved as relevant to the program area qualification. All 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07.1 
Page 2 of 4 
 
coursework must have been completed within the past five 
(5) years. Original transcripts are required if claiming an area 
under this provision. When submitting transcripts, please 
indicate the fifteen (15) course credits relevant to the 
program area qualification. If transcripts are not submitted 
by the deadline, the application can be denied. 
4. Two (2) years of teaching experience within Boston Public 
Schools in the subject area in the last ten (10) years. A 
creditable year is one in which at least 50% of the weekly 
schedule is in the subject area. A letter from the head of 
school or principal stating that you taught at least 50% of 
the weekly schedule in that area and designation of the 
specific year(s) will be required in the area you are claiming 
under this provision. If a letter is not submitted by the 
deadline, the application can be denied. 
 
Permanent teachers who wish to apply for additional program 
areas must submit their request via the  Additional Program Area 
Request form. Supplemental materials must be submitted to the 
Office of Human Resources by mail or in person.  
 Applications and complete documentation must be 
submitted to the Office of Human Resources by January 
15, 2024. Applications received after this date will not be 
reviewed. 
The Office of Human Resources has transitioned to using online 
forms. The link to the Additional Program Area Request form can 
be found below. Employees will be required to sign in with their 
Boston Public Schools Gmail account. Supplemental materials 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07.1 
Page 3 of 4 
 
such as transcripts can be submitted via mail or in person to the 
Office of Human Resources. 
LINK TO APPLY 
• Additional Program Area Request form 
• Or copy this URL: 
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdD7uA5nLZH
uEKE5pP4uD-gYtf74RCtzEcYZrgeauvwmNBB-
g/viewform 
SUPPLEMENTAL DOCUMENTATION 
 
Application approval is contingent on submission of one of the 
following documents: 
● Official transcript(s) indicating the completion of fifteen 
(15) graduate or undergraduate course credits relevant to 
the program area qualification 
● A signed letter from the head of school/principal 
confirming the following information: 
○ The subject area you taught (relevant to your 
application) 
○ The specific years (at least 2) during which you taught 
the subject (must be within the last 10 years) 
○ Confirmation that you taught at least 50% of the 
weekly schedule in that area. 
 
Please submit supplemental documents to the contact listed 
below. 
For more information about this circular, please contact: 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-HS07.1 
Page 4 of 4 
 
Owner: 
School Based Staffing 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Fax: 
617-635-7956 
Email: 
For additional questions, please submit an 
HR Inquiry Ticket via the Beacon. This can 
be found on Access Boston 
(access.boston.gov). 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


