Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-PP11  
Version 01 
 
DRUG FREE WORKPLACE POLICY AND PROCEDURE 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
It is the policy of the Boston Public Schools to maintain a 
workplace free from all unlawful drugs and substances and to 
insist that all staff, students, contracted providers, and others 
who work, attend, and/or visit facilities under the jurisdiction of 
the School Department avoid unlawful drug and substance use 
and abuse at all times.  In compliance with the federal Drug-Free 
Workplace Act of 1988 (P.L. 100-690) and its implementing 
regulations, all employees of the Boston Public Schools, 
contracted providers, students, and visitors to facilities under the 
jurisdiction of the School Committee are hereby notified that the 
unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, or 
use of a controlled substance (as listed in schedules I-V of Section 
202 of the Controlled Substances Act) is prohibited. Violations of 
this policy shall be subject to the provisions of federal and state 
law, to procedures relative to the discipline of employees, and to 
the provisions of the Code of Conduct of the Boston Public 
Schools. 
All employees must abide by this policy as a condition of 
employment.  Employees must notify their immediate supervisor 
within forty-eight (48) hours of any conviction (including a plea of 
nolo contendre) of a violation of any federal or state criminal drug 
law by an action committed in the workplace.  The employee’s 
immediate supervisor will notify the Office of Human Capital. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP11 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Within ten (10) days of receiving notice of such a conviction, it will 
be the responsibility of the superintendent or designee to notify 
the funding agency in those cases where the employee is directly 
engaged in the performance of work and is paid through a direct 
federal grant. The Development Office will prepare, annually for 
the Office of Human Capital, a list of employees covered by this 
provision of the regulations. 
Within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of such conviction, an 
investigation will be initiated. It will be the responsibility of the 
superintendent to recommend disciplinary action, including but 
not limited to suspension or dismissal. 
Boston Public Schools staff should be made aware of the services 
available through the City of Boston Employee Assistance 
Program (B.E.A.P.). Responsibility Center managers and directors 
are urged to refer to the B.E.A.P. any employee who 
demonstrates symptoms of drug or alcohol abuse at 617-635-
2200 or eap@boston.gov. The program is located at 43 Hawkins 
St., Boston. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Employee Services 
Department: 
Office of Human Capital 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street, Roxbury MA 02119 
Fax: 
617-635-7956 
Phone: 
617-635-9600 
Email:  
employeeservices@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


