Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HRS-L01 
Version 01 
 
 
 
STATE LICENSURE AND REQUIREMENTS FOR 
TEACHERS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
According to Massachusetts General Law, all teachers must hold 
a valid license issued by the Massachusetts Department of 
Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE) in the most 
appropriate subject and grade level corresponding to their 
teaching assignment(s). Teachers are not hired by BPS unless 
they qualify for the appropriate license or license waiver. A waiver 
permits the district to employ an unlicensed teacher for one 
school year only and does not count as a license. Waivers are 
requested only by the BPS Office of Human Resources in rare 
circumstances where there are no licensed candidates available 
to fill a position.  
This Superintendent’s Circular provides guidance for meeting 
Massachusetts state licensure requirements.  
I. DATA COLLECTION AND TRACKING PROCEDURES 
To collect and track data about the licensure of BPS teachers and 
paraprofessionals, the BPS Office of Human Resources requires 
online reporting of critical information, including Massachusetts 
Tests for Educator Licensure (MTEL) results, licensure status, 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L01 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 
 
coursework, and degree information of teachers. All teachers and 
their administrators must comply with these data collection 
procedures. Furthermore, it is every educator’s professional 
responsibility to know their personal licensure status and take 
the necessary steps to maintain their license validity.  
II. MASSACHUSETTS STATE LICENSURE REQUIREMENTS  
A. Know what license is required by your teaching position: 
o The license required for your position should be made 
clear to you upon hire, but when in doubt, ask your 
principal/head of school, Human Resources 
coordinator, or Human Resources manager. 
o The fundamental requirement is that teachers must 
possess the license that affords the most appropriate 
fit for their teaching assignment. For example, while it 
may seem acceptable for a teacher of 6th grade math 
and science to work under an Elementary (1-6) license, 
the MA DESE offers a Middle School Math/Science (5-8) 
license which is a more appropriate license for this 
teaching assignment. 
o For more information about currently offered licenses 
and specific requirements, visit 
www.doe.mass.edu/licensurehelp.  
o Individual’s official state licensure records and history 
can be accessed securely through the MA DESE’s ELAR 
portal at https://www.doe.mass.edu/licensure/elar/. If 
you do not know your username and/or password, click 
on "Forgot username/password" and it will walk you 
through some steps to retrieve the username and reset 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L01 
Page 3 of 8 
 
 
 
the password. If you still have difficulty, you can call the 
DESE Licensure Help Desk at 781-338-6600 and they 
should be able to reset it for you.  
o See Attachment A for guidance on which “type” of 
license (Provisional, Initial, Professional, Temporary) 
suits your level of preparation and/or experience. 
B. Apply for the appropriate license. 
o When interested in obtaining a new license, or 
advancing your non-professional license, the best first 
step is to apply for the license you plan to pursue. Even 
if you have not yet met all of the requirements, this is 
DESE's opportunity to evaluate your standing with 
regard to the current requirements and give you 
written instructions on what remains to be done. They 
leave all applications open until you are granted the 
license. 
o Online applications can be submitted through the MA 
DESE’s ELAR portal at 
https://www.doe.mass.edu/licensure/elar/, where you 
indicate which license you are interested in obtaining 
and pay the application fees. Applications cost $100 for 
the first submission and $25 for each additional. 
o Submit official transcripts (undergraduate and 
graduate) to the MA DESE by mail or in person. The 
address is: 
Office of Educator Licensure 
Mass. Dept. of Education 
75 Pleasant Street 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L01 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 
 
Malden, MA 02148 
o Additional documentation, such as out-of-state 
teaching licenses and letters verifying applicable 
teaching experience or preparation, may also need to 
be submitted.  
o Upon review of your application and transcripts, the 
MA DESE will notify you in writing if additional 
documentation or clarification is necessary, or if you 
still have additional requirements to complete. This is 
called the evaluation letter. It will give you instructions 
on your next steps. 
o Make sure your social security number appears on all 
documents sent to MA DESE. 
C. Take and pass all relevant MTELs. 
o The test(s) you are required to take will be dictated by 
the DESE, based on the application that you submitted. 
General information about which tests are required for 
which license can be found online at 
www.doe.mass.edu/licensurehelp. If you still aren’t 
certain which tests you need, and you do not have time 
to wait for the DESE’s evaluation letter, you may call 
the Office of Human Resources at 617-635-9600.  
D. Advance or renew your license. 
o Teachers who hold a temporary, provisional, or initial 
license are required to be working to advance toward a 
professional license. See attachment A for guidance on 
the progression of licenses. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L01 
Page 5 of 8 
 
 
 
o Teachers who hold a professional license must renew it 
every five calendar years. There is an expiration date 
associated with each individual’s professional license 
indicating when it needs to be renewed.  
o Renewal of a professional license requires the 
completion of 150 Professional Development Points 
(PDPs) within the five-year renewal period. At least 15 of 
these points must be in the content of the license (i.e., 
what you teach). The next 15 points must be in 
pedagogy (i.e., how you teach). Fifteen points must be 
in Sheltered English Immersion or English as a Second 
Language (SEI or ESL), 15 points must relate to training 
in schooling methods for students with disabilities 
and/or diverse learning styles, and the remaining 90 
points can be in “elective activities” that address other 
educational issues or improve student learning, 
content knowledge, or pedagogy.  
o The activities that teachers participate in to earn PDPs 
should be dictated by their Individualized Professional 
Development Plan (IPDP), which must be reviewed 
and signed for approval by their principal/head of 
school every two years. Signed copies of the approved 
IPDP must be maintained in the school building. 
o Visit https://www.doe.mass.edu/pd/ipdp.docx to view 
or print an IPDP template. 
o Online applications for renewal can be submitted 
through the MA DESE’s ELAR portal at 
https://www.doe.mass.edu/licensure/elar/ after all PDP 
requirements have been completed. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L01 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 
 
o All educators and other employees seeking licensure 
related verifications must complete this form.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Licensure Manager 
Department: 
Office of Human Resources 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9212 
Email: 
ohc@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L01 
Page 7 of 8 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENT A 
Massachusetts Teacher Licensure – At a Glance 
MASSACHUSETTS EDUCATOR LICENSURE 
Licenses granted by the Massachusetts Department of 
Elementary & Secondary Education 
75 Pleasant Street, Malden, MA 02148 
781-338-6600 
www.doe.mass.edu/licensurehelp 
 
YOU MAY START HERE… 
PROVISIONAL LICENSE  
TEMPORARY LICENSE  
• Valid for 5 years of employment  
• For people who have not 
completed an approved 
educator preparation program  
Requires:  
• A bachelor's degree  
• Passing score(s) on MTEL 
www.mtel.nesinc.com 
• Additional coursework required 
for elementary, early childhood, 
moderate disabilities, severe 
disabilities, library, and/or 
instructional technology  
• Valid for 1 calendar year  
• For experienced teachers 
from another state  
Requires:  
• Possession of a valid 
educator license/certificate 
from another state that is 
comparable to at least an 
initial license in 
Massachusetts  
• 3 years teaching under a 
valid out-of-state 
license/certificate 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HRS-L01 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 
 
…OR YOU MAY START HERE:  
INITIAL LICENSE 
PROFESSIONAL LICENSE 
• Valid for 5 years of employment  
• (May be extended one time for 5 
additional years of employment)  
Requires:  
• A bachelor's degree  
• Passing score(s) on MTEL, 
www.mtel.nesinc.com 
• Completion of an approved 
educator preparation program   
 
• Valid for 5 calendar years  
Requires:  
• 3 years of employment 
under the Initial license  
• Completion of a beginning 
teacher induction program 
• One of the capstone 
options for the Professional 
license (i.e., master’s degree 
including or in addition to 
12 graduate credits in 
content) 
• Continuing professional 
development required to 
renew Professional licenses 
every 5 calendar years 
 


