Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
HWD-03  
Version 01 
 
 
 
 
COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH EDUCATION POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
BACKGROUND 
Health education, as defined by the CDC, helps students “acquire 
functional health knowledge, strengthen attitudes and beliefs, 
and practice skills needed to adopt and maintain healthy 
behaviors throughout their lives.” Health education curricula 
should address the National Health Education Standards (NHES), 
incorporate the characteristics of an effective health education 
curriculum, and be taught by qualified, trained teachers. In 
addition, the American Cancer Society, the American Diabetes 
Association, and the American Heart Association believe that 
school health education programs can reduce health risk 
behaviors such as tobacco use, poor nutrition, lack of physical 
activity, drug and alcohol use, as well as actions that increase 
stress and risk of injury and violence. Because these behaviors are 
amenable to change, quality school health education taught by 
trained and licensed health educators provides the best 
opportunity to promote positive health behavior among children 
and adolescents.What Works in Schools  (Facts: Learning for Life 
Health Education in School)  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 2 of 11 
 
 
 
Health education is an integral component of quality school 
programming. Schools have direct contact with a significant 
number of Boston’s youth and for the critical years of students’ 
social, psychological, physical, and intellectual development. As a 
result, schools play an important role in improving students’ 
health and social outcomes as well as promoting academic 
success (CDC Healthy Schools). Healthy students are more ready 
and able to learn and are less likely to experience negative 
academic impact (e.g., academic failure, lower test scores, 
truancy, absenteeism) than students who engage in risky health 
behaviors. According to the CDC, schools cannot achieve their 
primary mission of education if students are not healthy, and 
schools can address the health needs of students in part through 
effective comprehensive health education. Research supports 
that school health programs and policies may be one of the most 
efficient ways to reduce risky behaviors in students, prevent 
health problems, and address the achievement gap. 
Boston Public Schools (BPS) believes, in accordance with the 
NHES, health education should empower students to practice 
behaviors that protect and promote their health while 
minimizing risks. Therefore, health education in BPS includes 
teaching health skills and essential concepts such as health 
literacy, health promotion, and health equity, with a strong focus 
on understanding the social determinants of health. 
In line with the NHES, BPS emphasizes a holistic approach to 
health by shifting the focus from specific health behaviors to 
overall well-being. This approach leverages the strengths and 
resources within students, their families, schools, and 
communities. It prioritizes equipping students with the health 
skills and essential knowledge needed to assist them in living 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 3 of 11 
 
 
 
healthier lives and to enable them to actively support their own 
health and the health of others within a broader societal context. 
The policy and implementation guidelines presented here 
explain how we, at Boston Public Schools, will create effective 
health education programming. 
  
POLICY 
The Boston Public Schools require comprehensive Pre-K through 
grade 12 health education that is medically accurate, age and 
developmentally appropriate, culturally and linguistically 
sustaining, and implemented in a safe and supportive learning 
environment where all students feel valued. All Boston Public 
Schools must take a skills-based approach to teach 
comprehensive health education that addresses a variety of 
topics, such as tobacco, alcohol, substance misuse and harm 
reduction, nutritional health, mental and emotional health, 
personal health and wellness, physical activity, safety and injury 
prevention, violence prevention, and comprehensive sexual 
health education that is LGBTQ+ affirming.  
 
Comprehensive health education curriculum shall be modified as 
needed for students with disabilities and students who are 
English learners. It shall promote healthy lifestyle habits, healthy 
relationships and health literacy for all students. Health 
education curricula will align with the BPS Health Education 
Frameworks, which integrate the Massachusetts Comprehensive 
Health and Physical Education Framework and National Health 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 4 of 11 
 
 
 
Education Standards, as well as the National Sexuality Education 
Standards. Qualified and trained teachers will implement the 
curricula. 
 
All schools will follow relevant promotion and graduation 
requirements that include: Health education that includes at 
minimum the Healthy and Safe Body Unit in elementary school; 
two semesters of health education in grades 6 to 8 taught by a 
licensed health education teacher; and a one-semester course of 
health education in total in grades 9 to 12 taught by a licensed 
health education teacher. In addition to these course 
requirements, health education topics will be integrated into 
other subject areas where possible, to reinforce their importance, 
provide additional skill practice, and demonstrate the 
connections of health concepts to many other content areas. 
  
IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES 
Boston Public Schools are committed to addressing the health 
and wellness of all students, in part, through effective health 
education programming. Therefore, BPS will require 
comprehensive pre-K-12 health education to be taught to all 
students throughout the district. The Boston Public Schools take 
a comprehensive approach to review and incorporate changes in 
policy, curricula, and implementation. This effort will result in a 
skills-based approach to teaching health education that 
promotes healthy lifestyle habits, healthy relationships, and 
health literacy for all students.  
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 5 of 11 
 
 
 
Schools will adhere to the following implementation guidelines: 
A. School leaders or their designees are responsible for 
implementing and enforcing this policy. Grade-level teams, 
lead health education teacher, or other instructional lead 
will determine, in collaboration with the school leader, how 
their school will meet the policy requirements relating to 
time, staffing, and implementation. School leaders may 
consult with the Director of Health Education in the Office of 
Health and Wellness on how their school can meet the 
policy requirements. 
 
B. BPS Policy requires that all students in PreK-12 should 
receive health education in line with promotion and 
graduation requirements that include a minimum of: 
a. The BPS Healthy and Safe Body Unit in elementary 
school 
b. Two semesters of health education in total grades 6 to 
8   
c. A one-semester course of health education in total in 
grades 9 to 12.   
C.  
 The National Health Education Standards recommend 
i. 
Pre-K to grade 2 receive a minimum of 40 hours of 
HE each year.  
ii. 
Grades 3 to 12 receive a minimum of 80 hours of 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 6 of 11 
 
 
 
HE each year.  
D. Staffing requirements: 
a. BPS supports a learning environment in which all 
teachers are highly qualified in the subject areas they 
teach. Therefore:  
i. 
In grades K-5, HE instruction must be 
implemented by trained teachers who hold an 
active and valid teaching license. 
ii. 
In grades 6-12, HE instruction must be 
implemented by trained teachers with an active 
and valid health education teaching license. 
b. If a school is unable to provide students with HE 
instruction from licensed teachers, they should contact 
the Office of Health and Wellness for support with 
identifying district-approved staffing alternatives. All 
HE staffing alternatives should be approved by the 
Office of Human Capital, the Office of Health and 
Wellness, and the school’s respective instructional 
superintendent. Staffing alternatives are only 
considered in extenuating circumstances or in 
situations that increase opportunities for students. 
E. The BPS HE curriculum must meet the following criteria. 
The district-endorsed curriculum is:  
a. Aligned with the 2023 Massachusetts Comprehensive 
Health and Physical Education Framework and 2024 
National Health Education Standards, as well as the 
2020 National Sex Education Standards 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 7 of 11 
 
 
 
b. Comprehensive, standards-based, and sequential; 
teaching a variety of skills and topics in such a way that 
student learning and skill development is built upon 
with each unit and each year 
c. Inclusive of a variety of topics, such as tobacco, alcohol, 
and other drug misuse; healthy eating/nutrition; 
mental and emotional health; personal health and 
wellness; physical activity; safety and injury prevention; 
violence and bullying prevention; and comprehensive 
sexual health education that is LGBTQ-inclusive 
d. Medically accurate and age and developmentally-
appropriate 
e. Culturally and linguistically sustaining, including but 
not limited to race, gender, sexual orientation, and 
cultural identity 
f. Modified as needed for students with disabilities and 
students who are English Learners 
g.  
F. District endorsed high quality instructional materials 
include the following curricula: CATCH K-8 HE Journeys, 
Goodheart-Wilcox Grades 6-12 Essential Health Skills and the 
PreK-Grade 12 Rights, Respect, Responsibility curriculum.  
G. Student assessments in HE must include graded 
competency (i.e. knowledge, skills, practice) and 
participation assessments that are reflected on all students’ 
report cards. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 8 of 11 
 
 
 
H. Implemented in safe and supportive learning environments 
in which all students feel acknowledged, respected,  and 
valued. 
I. Schools should include cross-curricular, interdepartmental 
collaborations to enhance the value and meaning of health 
education programming, including opportunities for 
students to think critically, globally, and inclusively to 
develop health literacy to enhance health equity. 
a. For example, the school recognizes World Health Day 
by organizing a student-led Wellness Day. In 
preparation, health education classes explore the social 
determinants of health and identify Boston-based 
community health resources to enhance personal, 
family, and community well-being. Meanwhile, in social 
studies, students research global health issues and 
create maps or infographics to illustrate how different 
regions are impacted by various health challenges, as 
well as the role of international organizations in 
addressing these issues. In math, students analyze and 
compare data from the National YRBS and the Boston 
YRBS creating graphs, and interpreting trends using a 
strengths-based approach. In computer science, 
students design a simple app or website to promote 
healthy habits, such as a sleep tracker, a nutrition diary, 
or a mental health check-in tool. This interdisciplinary 
approach encourages and motivates healthy behaviors 
by focusing on positive outcomes. 
J. Professional development is an essential component of 
effective policy implementation. Therefore, HE teachers will 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 9 of 11 
 
 
 
attend relevant professional development opportunities.  
a. Schools will support and encourage school personnel 
in their professional development. 
b. Teachers are expected to stay current in the fields of 
health and health education through the review, 
analysis, and implementation (when appropriate) of 
national, state, and local health policies, procedures 
and standards, research in best practice, guidelines 
from international, national, and state organizations, 
etc. 
K. Schools should monitor (or assign another individual to 
monitor) relevant student and community information that 
can assist in identifying priority areas for health education. 
This should include, but not be limited to, district- level 
Youth Risk Behavior Survey data, School Health Profiles 
data, school-level Health Services Data, and community 
public health trends. Data should be used to review and 
modify health education programming in order to ensure 
that it is meeting the needs of the students.  
L. Schools are required by the state to notify 
parents/guardians about any curriculum that primarily 
involves human sexual education or human sexuality issues, 
and permit parents/guardians to exempt their children 
without penalty from any portion of that curriculum (see 
Superintendent Circular HWD-05: Human Sexual Education 
Education - Parent Notification). Schools will engage 
families in their child’s health education by providing access 
to curricular materials and health-related information. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 10 of 11 
 
 
 
Schools will also encourage students to actively engage 
parents/caregivers and other family members in promoting 
healthy behaviors. 
M. Should schools decide to utilize community partners to 
support their health education program, they will refer to 
PartnerBPS and consult with the Office of Health and 
Wellness to identify the most appropriate community 
partners to meet their needs. Community partners can 
provide an important aspect of quality health education and 
can meaningfully support and enhance programming in 
BPS. If a school is using a community partner and/or 
supplementary materials and curriculum to teach sexual 
health education, the school must consult the Office of 
Health and Wellness for vetting and recommendations.  
N. The Office of Health and Wellness leads health education for 
the district and will support schools by: 
a. Vetting health education curriculum, materials, and 
resources 
b. Providing curriculum training and materials, 
professional development, instructional coaching, and 
technical assistance 
c. Maintaining and enhancing the BPS health education 
digital learning library 
d. Vetting and managing partnerships to ensure 
equitable support of HE education across the district 
e. Collaborating to offer family health education 
informational workshops and events 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-03 
Page 11 of 11 
 
 
 
f. Coordinate with other central office department to 
develop health promotions and family events on 
specific health topics when applicable and align with 
tier II and tier III services and programs provided by 
those departments 
 
We recognize that effectively implementing a comprehensive 
skills-based health education program can be challenging. The 
Office of Health and Wellness is committed to providing training, 
support, and resources to schools and school personnel to help in 
the implementation of this policy. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director of Health & Wellness 
Department: 
Health & Wellness 
Mailing 
Address: 
370 Columbia Rd, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-8709 
Email: 
healthandwellness@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


