Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
HWD-01 
Version 01 
 
 
 
 
DISTRICT WELLNESS POLICY 
 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
BACKGROUND 
2 
I. POLICY 
5 
A. Wellness Councils 
6 
B. Cultural Proficiency 
13 
C. School Food and Nutrition Promotion 
16 
D. Comprehensive Physical Activity and Physical Education 20 
E. Comprehensive Health Education 
25 
F. Healthy School Environment 
26 
G. Safe and Supportive Schools 
28 
H. Health Services 
30 
I. Staff Wellness 
33 
II. IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES 
33 
A. District Wellness Council: 
33 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 2 of 102 
 
 
 
B. School-based Wellness Councils: 
34 
C. Implementation Guidelines for Monitoring and Evaluation 38 
III. DEFINITIONS 
86 
IV. INDEX OF FEDERAL, STATE, AND BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOL 
WELLNESS-RELATED  
POLICIES & GUIDELINES 
91 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
  
Understanding that physical and mental health, emotional well-
being, and positive development are inextricably linked with 
academic success, Boston Public Schools (BPS or the District) has 
worked to transform the District’s capacity to meet the health 
needs of Boston children. Improving overall student health is a 
key factor in reaching the ambitious academic targets set forth in 
the Superintendent’s Strategic Implementation Plan. Beyond the 
academic imperative however, school, civic and community 
leaders have a responsibility to help Boston’s children overcome 
health barriers that may prevent them from successfully meeting 
the challenges of reaching adulthood and assuming their roles as 
the eventual leaders and stewards of our community.  Our vision 
for the BPS graduate challenges us to develop young people who 
are more than scholars. It calls for graduates who are healthy in 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 3 of 102 
 
 
 
both mind and body, prepared to make wise choices to ensure 
their own physical, mental, and emotional well-being. 
  
To create a healthy school environment where the healthy choice 
is the easy choice, we have developed this policy regarding 
wellness initiatives in Boston Public Schools. This policy took 
effect September 1, 2017. 
  
First passed on June 30, 2006, the District Wellness Policy was 
implemented in September 2006.  It was updated in June 2013, 
and again in June 2017 taking into consideration the needs and 
perspectives expressed by members of the Boston School 
community, and responding to both the Healthy, Hunger-Free 
Kids Act1 and Massachusetts Standards for School Wellness 
Advisory Committees.2 This document is intended to assist 
administrators and Wellness Council members in implementing 
these guidelines in their schools. 
  
This District Wellness Policy reflects the comprehensive 
approach stated in the District’s Strategic Plan for Health and 
Wellness, Healthy Connections: Strengthening Coordination and 
 
1 P.L. 111–296—DEC. 13, 2010 
2 105 CMR 215 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 4 of 102 
 
 
 
Capacity in the Boston Public Schools to Advance Student 
Health and Wellness and brings together content areas 
recommended in the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention’s Whole School Whole Community Whole Child 
Approach. A subcommittee of the District Wellness Council 
formed into seven work groups, representing these topic areas: 
1. Cultural Proficiency 
2. School Food and Nutrition Promotion 
3. Comprehensive Physical Activity   
4. Comprehensive Health Education 
5. Healthy School Environment 
6. Health Services 
7. Safe and Supportive Schools 
8. Staff Wellness 
  
These work groups consulted the perspectives of the Boston 
School community as well as evidence-based national 
recommendations and wrote specific policy language and 
implementation guidelines that reference other relevant District 
policies and further develop policy language regarding wellness 
for all students. This comprehensive approach seeks to advance 
Boston Public Schools’ strategic aims to: improve coordination 
across programs and departments; improve and integrate data 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 5 of 102 
 
 
 
collection; establish guidelines for accountability appropriate to 
the group’s location within the organization; support building 
noncompeting partnerships internally and externally; and build 
sustainability.   
 
I. POLICY 
  
The Boston Public Schools (BPS or the District) aims to actively 
promote the social, emotional and physical health and wellness 
of all students to advance both their healthy development and 
readiness to learn. Student and staff wellness is a core value of 
the District and a key strategy to address health inequities and to 
close opportunity and achievement gaps that impact BPS 
students. Thus, BPS strives to be one of the healthiest school 
districts in the country. BPS will ensure that the healthy choice is 
the easy choice and that students learn the skills and knowledge 
needed to make those choices. BPS is committed to 
implementing a Whole School Whole Community Whole Child 
(WSCC) approach to wellness, as recommended by the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and ASCD (Association 
of Supervisors and Curriculum Development). As a part of this 
approach, BPS will meet the health and wellness needs of all 
students through prevention, intervention and intensive 
response. As a result, all BPS students will be challenged, 
supported, engaged, safe and healthy.                                                          
  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 6 of 102 
 
 
 
The District Wellness Policy is intended to link new and existing 
wellness-related policies and convey a framework for creating 
safe, healthy and welcoming school environments. BPS shall take 
a comprehensive approach to reviewing and incorporating 
changes in policy, curriculum, and operating procedures to 
promote healthy lifestyles and sustainable wellness practices for 
all students and staff. The work of implementing this policy relies 
on the work and collaboration of instructional, operational, 
clinical  
and administrative staff at schools and central office 
departments. BPS shall develop the capacity of schools to 
implement the policy and improve the quality and equity of 
programs, services, and supports. This policy is inclusive of all 
students, staff, and families. 
  
A. WELLNESS COUNCILS 
  
1.) District Wellness Council 
The BPS shall maintain a superintendent-appointed District 
Wellness Council. This advisory group will develop, recommend, 
review and advise on implementation of school District policies 
that address student and staff wellness. The District Wellness 
Policy shall be reviewed once yearly by the District Wellness 
Council and considered for updates based on other model school 
wellness policies and best practices, annual report findings and 
recommendations, input from schools and the community, 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 7 of 102 
 
 
 
research evidence, and regulations. The District Wellness Council 
shall seek ongoing feedback from BPS community stakeholders. 
Additionally, the District Wellness Council will develop an annual 
Wellness Action Plan with goals and SMART objectives for the 
coming school year.  
  
This council shall include at a minimum representatives from: 
families, students, school and District instructional and 
operational administrators, relevant central department heads, 
school food and nutrition services staff, physical education and 
health education teachers, school nurses and other school health 
professionals (e.g. psychologists, guidance counselors, social 
workers) a school committee member, community youth serving 
agencies, Boston Public Health Commission representatives, 
healthcare providers and the general public. Appointees to the 
maximum extent possible shall reflect the cultural, linguistic, and 
ethnic composition of BPS schools. General membership and 
attendance at the District Wellness Council is open to all 
stakeholders and the general public. The District Wellness 
Council will implement a plan for involving and engaging all of 
these stakeholders. 
  
2.) School-based Wellness Councils 
All BPS schools shall establish and maintain a school-based 
wellness council. School-based wellness councils shall act as a 
shared leadership team to implement wellness-related District 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 8 of 102 
 
 
 
policies. Councils must assess their school’s implementation of 
the Wellness Policy and create and implement an annual 
Wellness Action Plan as a part of the Quality School Plan. 
Principals shall name a wellness council chair(s) to coordinate the 
wellness council and act as a liaison to the District, community, 
and families. Wellness council chairs will attend District training. 
The council shall include at a minimum a school administrator, 
family representatives, students (where feasible), representatives 
of a wide range of school health and health-related disciplines, 
including school nurses, school food service staff, health 
education and physical education teachers and other school 
health professionals, such as psychologists, guidance counselors, 
and social workers. To the extent feasible, members will include 
operations and custodial staff, community partners and the 
general public.  Appointees to the maximum extent possible shall 
reflect the cultural, linguistic and ethnic composition of the 
school community.     
 
  
3.) Stakeholder Participation in Councils / Informing and 
Updating the Public 
The District will develop a district-level communication strategy 
and communication guidance for schools to increase awareness 
of the policy and its importance for creating a safe, healthy, and 
welcoming school. a.  The following are responsibilities for 
informing stakeholders about policy: 
1. BPS will post the District Wellness Policy on the BPS 
website. 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 9 of 102 
 
 
 
2. Schools must share a link to the District Wellness Policy on 
their school’s website and send a message to families 
notifying them of how they may obtain a copy or otherwise 
access the policy. 
3. School-based Wellness Councils shall annually 
communicate wellness-related policies so that all staff, 
families and students are aware of the policy requirements. 
4. BPS and schools shall notify families and the public about 
the content of the District Wellness Policy and any updates 
to the policy on an annual basis. 
5. BPS will ensure that the District Wellness Policy and any 
public announcement related to the policy are available in 
the languages that represent the school community. 
  
b.  The following are responsibilities for informing stakeholders 
about the District Wellness Council and school-based councils: 
1. BPS will make available to the public and school 
community, on the BPS website and through other regular 
channels of communication that BPS utilizes, a list of names 
and position titles (or relationship to the school) of 
individuals who are a part of the District Wellness Council, 
including the name, position title, and school- based contact 
information of the council leadership and subcommittee co-
chairs. 
2. BPS will post the District Wellness Action Plan on the BPS 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 10 of 102 
 
 
 
website to share District goals and objectives for the school 
year. 
3. Schools must make available to the public and school 
community on their website a list of names and position 
titles (or relationship to the school) of individuals who are a 
part of their school-based wellness councils and include the 
name, position title, and school-based contact information 
of the council chairs(s). 
4. Schools must post their Wellness Action Plans on their 
school’s website to share local school goals and activities to 
implement the policy. 
5. BPS shall make available to the public and the schools the 
results of the annual assessment, which is detailed in the 
next section, and actively notify families of the availability of 
the assessment results. 
  
c. The following are responsibilities for engaging stakeholders: 
1. The District Wellness Council and school-based councils will 
encourage diverse membership on councils and 
subcommittees, attendance at meetings, and participation 
of all BPS stakeholders through public comment and 
feedback. 
2. BPS will share information on the District website about 
how the public can get involved with the District and 
school-based wellness councils. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 11 of 102 
 
 
 
3. Schools must share information on their school’s website 
about how the public can get involved with the school 
wellness councils. 
4. BPS will develop methods to educate students about 
wellness policies and ways they can be involved in the 
wellness councils when developmentally appropriate. 
                                                                                                                     
 
4.) Monitoring, Assessment and Reporting 
BPS shall develop and implement an evaluation plan designed to 
measure school-level implementation and student level 
outcomes of all policy components of the District Wellness Policy. 
Where possible the metrics will align with other District 
indicators and be measurable using existing evaluation tools and 
systems and be sustainable over time. This plan will be made 
available to the public as a part of the District Wellness Policy 
circular. 
  
BPS shall annually assess compliance with the District Wellness 
Policy, alternating between qualitative and quantitative annual 
assessments. The annual assessment will measure the extent to 
which schools are in compliance with the BPS policy and the 
progress made in attaining the goals of the previous year’s 
Wellness Action Plan. The District Wellness Council will write an 
annual report that will include: the results of assessment, the 
extent to which the Boston Public School District Wellness Policy 
compares to model local school wellness policies, a summary of 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 12 of 102 
 
 
 
the District activities and accomplishments related to wellness 
policy implementation of the previous year, and goals and 
objectives for the upcoming year. This annual report shall be 
presented to the superintendent, the School Committee and the 
Massachusetts Department of Education. The District will 
develop a strategy for reporting on compliance of each school. 
  
BPS shall maintain records to document compliance with 
Wellness Policy including: the written District Wellness Policy; 
documentation demonstrating compliance with community 
involvement requirements; documentation of the annual 
assessment of the District Wellness Policy; and documentation to 
demonstrate compliance with the annual public notification 
requirements. 
  
5.) Wellness Policy Leadership 
School principals are responsible for ensuring their school 
complies with the Wellness Policy. At the District level, the 
executive director of the Office of Health and Wellness is 
responsible for overseeing monitoring, reporting, and 
communication of the BPS Wellness Policy. The following District 
departments are responsible for supporting implementation and 
monitoring of specific components of the policy: 
a. Behavioral Health Services 
b. Facilities & Capital Management 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 13 of 102 
 
 
 
c. Food and Nutrition Services 
d. Health and Wellness 
e. Health Services 
f. Office of Engagement 
g. Office of Equity 
h. Office of Opportunity Gaps 
i. Safe and Welcoming Schools 
j. Transportation 
  
The compiled department information will be reported to 
instructional superintendents and operational superintendents 
who are granted the authority and responsibility by the 
superintendent to ensure each school complies with the policy. 
BPS will provide a means of contacting the District or school 
official(s) responsible for oversight by designating District or 
school-based phone(s) number and/or email address for this 
purpose. 
  
B. CULTURAL PROFICIENCY 
             
 
The Boston Public Schools is committed to creating a culturally 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 14 of 102 
 
 
 
proficient District that embraces at its fundamental core the 
culturally sustaining and affirming beliefs and practices that 
honor differences while mitigating the effects of concentrated 
poverty and institutional racism in the effort to eliminate gaps 
and promote health and wellness for all. The District is 
committed to providing authentic learning opportunities for 
every child in every classroom in every school to ensure they 
develop into healthy, engaged, self-determined, and 
independent learners that are college and career ready. The 
District recognizes that Culturally and Linguistically Sustaining 
Practices (CLSP) helps to create a safe, healthy and welcoming 
environment that supports all students’ social, emotional, 
physical and academic learning as well as their health and 
wellness. Cultural Proficiency is an approach that raises 
awareness of individual and institutional culture and bias, 
encourages cultural learning and relationship building, and 
implements CLSP, to respect, celebrate and build on cultural 
strengths and diversity. Cultural diversity includes but is not 
limited to group and/or individual identities based on race, 
ethnicity, nationality, immigration status, religion, language, 
gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, ability, social class, 
and home life or family structure. Cultural Proficiency should be 
integrated into the implementation of other areas of the District 
Wellness Policy and is called out here to establish specific actions 
to be taken by the District and the schools. 
  
The District will support the development of staff and 
administrators’ competencies to build cultural proficiency in 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 15 of 102 
 
 
 
schools, classrooms and central office departments. Schools shall 
collectively assess their organizational structure, policies and 
school-wide practices for bias(es) as well as examine their 
physical environment, classroom curricula, instructional materials 
and wellness promotions. Schools will use this assessment to 
inform their annual Wellness Action Plan. The District and the 
schools shall include student, family and community 
participation in decision-making bodies and create structures for 
feedback from students, families and communities and increased 
engagement of all families in wellness-related policies and 
committees. This includes recognizing specific barriers faced by 
families of ELL students and ELL students with disabilities by 
targeting outreach to these groups and using the Translation and 
Interpretation Unit to translate family-focused communications 
and to provide interpretation as requested during meetings. 
  
Schools will follow other cultural proficiency-related policies, 
including those regarding race, ethnicity, immigration status, 
religion, language, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, 
and disabilities and policies that promote family and student 
engagement. The work of creating a culturally proficient District 
requires the participation of departments and staff across the 
District and requires engagement in interdepartmental 
collaboration. 
  
  


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 16 of 102 
 
 
 
C. SCHOOL FOOD AND NUTRITION PROMOTION 
  
The Boston Public Schools supports lifelong healthy eating habits 
for all students and staff and is committed to addressing the 
increasing rates of diet-related health consequences among 
these groups by creating a healthy school food environment.  
Serving healthy choices in the lunchroom, limiting availability 
and marketing of unhealthful foods and sugary drinks, and 
making water available to students throughout the day are some 
of the ways to create a healthy school food environment. BPS is 
committed to ensuring food sold or served outside of the 
cafeteria meets high nutritional standards. 
  
Boston Public Schools believes the cafeteria is an essential 
setting to educate and promote healthy eating habits. Boston 
Public Schools is committed to serving students nutritious and 
delicious food that is less processed, more locally sourced, and 
culturally responsive to reflect the diverse student population. As 
an effective way to improve the nutritional quality of both foods 
served in schools and consumed by students, BPS will create and 
implement School Meals Nutrition Standards, going beyond 
federal requirements. BPS shall undertake a constant review of 
school food and the food environment to ensure safety, quality, 
menu equity, and innovation. Boston Public Schools shall be an 
innovator with school food, serving foods that are new and 
exciting for the students. We believe that students deserve meals 
reflective of their culture and tastes. We believe eating well is not 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 17 of 102 
 
 
 
a privilege; it is a right. Therefore, BPS is committed to ensuring 
all students are food secure. 
  
Key requirements of creating a healthy school food environment 
are: 
  
1.) School Meals Program 
a. Ensure all menus meet USDA-mandated requirements, as 
well as Massachusetts Department of Public Health 
regulations and the latest scientific evidence on healthy 
eating practices. At a minimum, schools must follow Bronze 
status standards for the Alliance for a Healthier Generation, 
and work toward Bronze status standards for the Healthier 
US School Challenge. 
b. Ensure all menus offer variety and are well presented in an 
appealing way, and meals and menu items are labeled to 
communicate deliciousness, as well as specific ingredients. 
c. Encourage students to participate in breakfast, lunch, and 
afterschool meals programs and avoid stigmatizing children 
who participate. 
d. Provide foods that are free of unwanted ingredients 
including, trans fats, high fructose corn syrup, artificial 
colors, artificial sweeteners, additives (azodicarbonamide, 
bromated flour), and artificial preservatives (nitrates, nitrites, 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 18 of 102 
 
 
 
sulfates, sulfites, MSG, BHA, BHT, TBHQ). Menus follow the 
BPS Menu and Ingredient Guidelines. The guidelines are 
updated annually. 
e. Reduce material used for packaging, sourcing recyclable or 
compostable materials when possible and working to 
promote best practices around recycling and composting. 
f. Water must be available at no cost during mealtimes 
wherever meals are served. 
  
2.) Food Safety 
a. Ensure kitchen facilities (both prep and satellite locations) 
are inspected twice a year by the Inspectional Services 
Division (ISD - Health Department). 
b. Implement a stringent and detailed internal Hazard Analysis 
and Control Points (HACCP) plan that provides regulations 
in following safety procedures for food recalls, emergency 
preparedness to avoid foodborne illnesses, and the spread 
of infectious diseases. 
c. Ensure all employees who work 5+ hours are certified in 
food safety. 
d. Ensure all lead employees are allergy awareness certified 
and have American Heart Association HeartSaver First Aid 
Program 2-year certification. 
  


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 19 of 102 
 
 
 
3.) Nutrition Education, Promotion and Food & Beverage 
Marketing 
a. Promote health and nutrition messages that encourage the 
consumption of fruits and vegetables, whole grains, healthy 
fats, low-fat dairy products, and water and other messages 
consistent with research-based findings that indicate a 
positive impact on health. 
b. Identify opportunities to teach healthy eating habits in 
health education, physical education, and other subjects, 
and through cafeteria and other school-wide promotions. 
c. Identify opportunities to support teachers, school staff, and 
parents around modeling healthy eating habits and 
following appropriate nutritional standards at school 
celebrations and staff meetings. 
d. Allow only food and beverage marketing on school grounds, 
including items shared with students, that promote foods 
and/or beverages that meet the BPS nutritional standards. 
  
4.) Competitive Food & Beverages 
a. All schools shall follow federal, state, and local laws and 
regulations for competitive foods and beverages (i.e. foods 
sold, provided, or served within school buildings or on 
school grounds outside of the school meals program) as 
outlined in this circular.  


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 20 of 102 
 
 
 
b. Prohibit food sold in competition with school meals, 
including food-based fundraisers and vending machines 
during the school day.   
c. The Food and Nutrition Services Department is solely 
responsible for food and beverages sold to children during 
the school day; consequently, the sale of food and beverages 
by others is expressly forbidden. 
d. Encourage non-food alternatives for school fundraisers, 
school parties, and classroom celebrations.  
e. Prohibit the use of food and beverage as a reward or means 
of discipline.  
  
All Boston Public Schools shall follow Food and Nutrition Services 
policies and circulars. 
  
D. COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND PHYSICAL 
EDUCATION 
  
The Boston Public Schools is committed to a District-wide, 
strategic effort to increase all students’ physical activity and 
fitness by bringing more physical education and physical activity 
to schools; improving the quality of physical education and 
recess; and increasing the equity of physical activity programs 
and resources across our schools. Activities will be inclusive to 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 21 of 102 
 
 
 
meet the needs, interests, abilities and cultural diversity of all 
students, including students of all gender identities, students 
with disabilities, and students with special healthcare needs. 
  
Numerous studies indicate that regularly engaging in moderate-
to-vigorous exercise contributes to overall physical and mental 
health and that nurturing an exercise habit among children lays 
the foundation for lifelong fitness. Research also shows that 
increased physical activity increases children’s cognitive function, 
ability to concentrate in class, and academic performance.  Thus, 
as a part of a strategic effort to improve academic performance, 
BPS recognizes and promotes the benefits of a Comprehensive 
Physical Activity Program, where quality physical education is the 
cornerstone and additional physical activity is integrated 
throughout the school day and into before and after school 
programs, staff wellness and family engagement activities. 
  
The Boston Public Schools is committed to a strong athletics 
program that offers a variety of programs and is accessible to all 
students. Athletics participation can contribute to student fitness, 
wellness, character development and a lifelong commitment to a 
physically active lifestyle. Additionally, by establishing a safe, 
supportive and engaging school environment, athletic programs 
encourage school connectedness and create a climate where 
healthy competition and support fill the school with spirit and a 
sense of community. Research shows that healthy children are 
better learners and connected students are more likely to stay in 


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 22 of 102 
 
 
 
school. In this way, athletics contributes to the academic success 
of students. 
  
In accordance with state law, all schools must provide all 
students in all grades with opportunities for physical activity. 
Schools must offer at least 150 minutes of in-school physical 
activity weekly in grades PreK-8, including required physical 
education, movement breaks, recess, or lessons involving 
movement structured to support moderate-to-vigorous physical 
activity (MVPA).  In grades PreK-8, students are expected to have 
at least 20 minutes of daily recess.  
  
Teachers and other school and community personnel shall not 
use physical activity (e.g., running laps, pushups) as punishment 
nor withhold opportunities for physical activity during the school 
day (including but not limited to recess, classroom physical 
activity breaks, or physical education) as punishment for any 
reason other than illness or safety or as approved by the school 
leader. This includes denying a student physical activity time in 
order to make up work unless under unusual circumstances. The 
district will provide teachers and other school staff with a list of 
ideas for alternative ways to discipline students. 
 
All schools must offer standards-based physical education (PE) 
for all students in all grades.  Schools are required to offer at least 
45 minutes of weekly PE in grades PreK-8 and at least one 


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 23 of 102 
 
 
 
semester (equivalent of a half school year) of PE each year in 
grades 9-12.  We recommend that schools provide at least 80 
minutes of weekly PE in grades PreK-8.  In order to help schools 
work toward this recommendation, Boston Public Schools will 
develop an implementation plan with input from current 
principals and headmasters. This implementation plan will be 
shared with the School Committee. 
 
Teachers and other school and community personnel shall not 
use physical activity (e.g., running laps, pushups) as punishment; 
withhold opportunities for physical activity during the school day 
(including but not limited to recess, classroom physical activity 
breaks or physical education) as punishment for any reason; or 
deny a student physical activity time in order to make up work 
unless under unusual circumstances. 
  
Extended day programs and out of school time, which includes 
before and after school programs, are expected to offer an array 
of physical activity opportunities to ensure all students are able to 
participate. Schools shall offer opportunities for students to 
participate in physical activity before and after the school day, 
including extended day time, through a variety of methods 
including physical activity clubs, physical activity in before/after 
school programs, intramurals and interscholastic sports, and in 
their school commute.  
  


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 24 of 102 
 
 
 
The District recognizes that students benefit from bicycle and 
pedestrian safety education to help make the trip to and from 
school safer and instill confidence in students, parents and 
community members. The District will develop and maintain 
policies and procedures for working together with city agencies, 
schools, families, and students in efforts to promote a safer and 
easier trip to and from school when students and staff are 
walking, bicycling, using public transit or other means of 
physically active transport. The District will encourage 7-12th 
grade students to use public transportation when available and 
appropriate for travel to school, and will work with the local 
transit agency to provide transit passes for eligible 7-12th grade 
students. The District will provide resources to schools, students 
and families regarding walking, riding a bicycle, using public 
transit or other forms of active transportation.  The District will 
encourage wellness councils, school administrators and students, 
staff, families and community partners to assist the District in 
promoting safe, physically active travel to and from school. 
Schools are encouraged to designate a transportation liaison to 
facilitate communication regarding District efforts to promote 
safe, physically active travel to and from school. Schools shall 
participate in student transportation surveys when requested to 
help the District plan for strategies to promote a safer and easier 
trip to and from school when walking, bicycling, using public 
transit or other means of physically active transport. 
 


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 25 of 102 
 
 
 
E. COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH EDUCATION 
  
The Boston Public Schools require comprehensive Pre-K through 
grade 12 health education that is medically accurate, age and 
developmentally appropriate, culturally and linguistically 
sustaining, and implemented in a safe and supportive learning 
environment where all students feel valued. All Boston Public 
Schools must take a skills-based approach to teach 
comprehensive health education that addresses a variety of 
topics, such as tobacco, alcohol, and substance misuse and harm 
reducation, nutritional health, mental and emotional health, 
personal health and wellness, physical activity, safety and injury 
prevention, violence prevention, and comprehensive sexual 
health education that is LGBTQ+ affirming.  
 
Comprehensive health education curriculum shall be modified as 
needed for students with disabilities and students who are 
English learners. It shall promote healthy lifestyle habits, healthy 
relationships and health literacy for all students. Health 
education curricula will align with the BPS Health Education 
Frameworks, which integrate the Massachusetts Comprehensive 
Health Curriculum Framework and National Health Education 
Standards, as well as the National Sexuality Education Standards. 
Qualified and trained teachers will implement the curricula. 
 
All schools will follow relevant promotion and graduation 


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 26 of 102 
 
 
 
requirements that include: Health education that includes at 
minimum the Healthy and Safe Body Unit in elementary school; 
two semesters of health education in grades 6 to 8 taught by a 
licensed health education teacher; and a one semester course of 
health education in total in grades 9 to 12 taught by a licensed 
health education teacher. In addition to these course 
requirements, health education topics will be integrated into 
other subject areas where possible, so as to reinforce their 
importance, provide additional skill practice, and demonstrate 
the connections of health concepts to many other content areas. 
  
F. HEALTHY SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT 
  
The Boston Public Schools recognizes that healthy physical 
environments are critical to the prevention of asthma and other 
chronic and infectious diseases that impact learning. The Boston 
Public Schools is committed to providing high-performing school 
buildings and grounds that are clean, in good repair, have 
healthy indoor air quality and water quality, sanitary and 
accessible bathrooms, and use resources efficiently. BPS strives 
to provide adequate facilities for physical activity that are 
accessible and culturally inclusive learning environments that 
positively impact productivity, health, and wellness of all students 
and staff. To address environmental risk factors for chronic and 
infectious disease, each school will receive an Annual 
Environmental Audit to evaluate health and safety conditions 
such as leaks, mold, pests, chemical storage and cleanliness. The 


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 27 of 102 
 
 
 
District shall maintain a Healthy Schools Taskforce (HST) to 
promote and raise awareness of the health of the built 
environment and ensure continuous improvement of BPS 
healthy school environment policies and programs.  
  
District departments and all schools, through an Environmental 
Committee or school-based Wellness Council, shall comply with 
existing federal and state regulations, city ordinances and District 
policies related to promoting and managing healthy school 
environments, including but not limited to: 
○ Green Cleaners 
○ Integrated Pest Management 
○ Trash and Recycling 
○ Infection Prevention & Control 
○ Tobacco Free Environmental Policy 
○ Environmental Inspection/Audit 
○ Student Safety/Health in School Shops 
○ BPS Water Policy 
○ Laboratories and Chemical Inventory “Right to Know” Law 
○ Idling of buses and other motor vehicles on school property 
  


Page 28:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 28 of 102 
 
 
 
Schools shall regularly assess the quality and quantity of BPS 
facilities for active transportation, physical activity, and physical 
education, including schoolyards, and report maintenance needs 
for these facilities. 
 
G. SAFE AND SUPPORTIVE SCHOOLS 
  
The Boston Public Schools shall create a safe and supportive 
school environment for all students that is culturally proficient, 
engaging, and inclusive and one that provides skills-based 
education to promote healthy relationships and development 
and provides access to support services. Prevention, promotion 
and intervention-based work will address and integrate social 
emotional health and behavioral health. BPS will continue to 
foster a variety of integrated community partnerships to 
maximize support to students, families and schools. Partnerships 
in this area include allied city and state agencies, universities, 
hospitals and other community-based organizations. Schools will 
better meet the needs of students by creating safe and inclusive 
climates that are responsive to all forms of bullying and violence, 
including bias-based conduct, suicide, intimate partner violence, 
and sexual harassment and assault, and using screening and 
promotion efforts, including mental health and substance use 
screening.  Special attention will be given to vulnerable student 
populations, including but not limited to LGBTQ students, 
refugee, asylee, documented and undocumented immigrant 
students, ELL students and ELL students with disabilities, 


Page 29:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 29 of 102 
 
 
 
expectant and parenting students, court-involved students, 
students experiencing homelessness, and students experiencing 
trauma. These efforts will create a safe and supportive learning 
environment that optimizes academic outcomes for all students. 
Implementation of these efforts requires school psychologists, 
social workers, guidance counselors, school nurses, community 
partners and trained classroom teachers working together on an 
effective student support team. Boston Public Schools shall 
develop and implement a plan for K-12 SEL standards. 
  
Boston Public Schools shall put in place systems that align to the 
district-accepted Multi-tiered System of Supports (MTSS) 
framework to ensure that all students have access to key 
resources and services in a safe and supportive environment. 
Schools shall adopt a MTSS Framework to support the 
development of a continuum of behavioral health supports and 
interventions falling across three tiers: Tier 1: Prevention and 
promotion, Tier 2: At-risk interventions and services and Tier 3: 
Intensive interventions and services.  Embedded into MTSS is the 
use of positive behavioral interventions and supports and social 
emotional learning instruction designed to create safe and 
supportive school climates and build the skills of staff and 
students.  The Comprehensive Behavioral Health Model (CBHM) 
is an example of an evidence-based MTSS-Behavioral framework 
designed to meet the behavioral health needs of students and 
includes evidence-based practices interventions and data to 
determine effectiveness. CBHM is used in many BPS schools and 
will be made available to all schools. CBHM has been proven to 


Page 30:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 30 of 102 
 
 
 
promote positive behavioral health and reduce barriers to 
learning for students in participating schools. MTSS framework, 
including CBHM, incorporates the following key elements: 
○ Assessment including universal behavioral health screening 
○ Instruction including social emotional learning curriculum 
and delivery of services 
○ Data based decision making 
○ Building staff leadership and capacity 
○ Effective District and school structures and procedures (e.g. 
student support teams) 
  
In addition, schools shall follow all BPS policies that address 
specific areas of school safety and climate including the Code of 
Conduct and other related policies such as those related to crisis 
management, expectant and parenting students, sexual 
harassment, discrimination, and assault. 
  
H. HEALTH SERVICES 
  
The Boston Public School Health Services support students to be 
healthy, engaged, safe, and academically challenged by 
providing high quality, cost-effective in-school health care. BPS 
nurses are responsible for evaluating and managing the health 


Page 31:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 31 of 102 
 
 
 
needs of all students. That includes the following: 
○ Case management students with special health needs, 
including chronic or acute illnesses 
○ Monitoring and administering medications and medical 
procedures as prescribed by a student’s primary care 
provider or medical specialist 
○ Providing first aid and emergency care 
○ Screening students for height, weight, Body Mass Index, 
vision, hearing, scoliosis, substance use (screening, brief 
intervention and referral to treatment) 
○ Managing student medical records and immunization 
records 
○ Managing the control of communicable diseases 
○ Coordinating medical transportation for students 
○ Coordinating special dietary accommodations for students 
with food allergies 
○ Working with other school-based groups to provide safe 
and healthy environments 
  
In addition, school nurses engage in one-on-one education, small 
group health counseling, wellness promotion, and preventive 
services as part of the provision of care coordination services. BPS 
school nurses ensure access and/or referrals to the medical home 


Page 32:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 32 of 102 
 
 
 
or private health care provider. Where lawful, Boston Public 
Schools encourages positive communication and involvement 
with family regarding health services. Health Services actively 
collaborates with school and community support services to 
increase the ability of students and families to adapt to health 
and social stressors, such as chronic health conditions, adverse 
childhood experiences (ACE) and other social, emotional and 
economic determinants of health. BPS Health Services is 
committed to building partnerships with city agencies, medical 
providers, and community partners to leverage additional 
resources and health services. 
  
Under Massachusetts Adolescent Confidentiality laws, adolescent 
students may receive confidential services for diagnosis, 
treatment and/or referral for drug addiction, family planning 
services, sexually transmitted diseases, and mental health. In 
accordance with the BPS Condom Accessibility Circular, BPS 
High Schools shall provide access to condoms, with appropriate 
reproductive health counseling for students. Each high school 
will have a Condom Accessibility Team (CAT) which will consist of 
a minimum of at least three school staff members. Condoms will 
be made available through the CAT at each school. Condoms will 
also be accessible from community health service partners and 
the Boston Public Health Commission (BPHC). Parents and legal 
guardians may exempt their children from receiving condoms by 
notifying the school when they complete the family information 
forms at the beginning of the school year. This exemption to not 
receive condoms does not apply to other confidential health 


Page 33:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 33 of 102 
 
 
 
services.  
  
I. STAFF WELLNESS 
  
The Boston Public Schools cares about the well-being of staff 
members and understands the influence that staff actions have 
on all student health behaviors. All staff shall promote a school 
environment supportive of healthy behaviors. Adults are 
encouraged to model healthy behaviors, especially on school 
property and at school-sponsored meetings and events. Schools 
are encouraged to support staff wellness initiatives. 
 
 
II. IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES 
  
The following guidelines will ensure the implementation of the 
Boston Public Schools Wellness Policy: 
  
A. DISTRICT WELLNESS COUNCIL: 
 
The superintendent will appoint members to serve on the District 


Page 34:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 34 of 102 
 
 
 
Wellness Council. The council will: 
  
a. Follow bylaws that are aligned with Massachusetts 
Standards for School Wellness Advisory Committees.3 
b. Annually review, and if needed recommend, District-wide 
policies to promote student wellness 
c. Annually set Council goals and objectives 
d. Annually report progress on Council goals, objectives, 
policies, and monitoring & evaluation of Wellness Policy 
implementation 
  
B. SCHOOL-BASED WELLNESS COUNCILS: 
  
Schools will establish and maintain a school-based wellness 
council. Principals shall name a wellness council chair(s) to 
coordinate the wellness council and act as a liaison to the District, 
community, and families. Wellness council chairs will attend 
District training. School-based Wellness Councils on an annual 
basis shall: 
 
3 M.G.L. 105 CMR 215  


Page 35:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 35 of 102 
 
 
 
  
a. Convene at least 4 times per school year. 
b. The council shall include at a minimum a school 
administrator, family representatives, students (where 
feasible), representatives of a wide range of school health 
and health-related disciplines, including school nurses, 
school food service staff, health education and physical 
education teachers and other school health professionals, 
such as psychologists, guidance counselors, and social 
workers. To the extent feasible, members will include 
operations and custodial staff, community partners and the 
general public.  Appointees to the maximum extent possible 
shall reflect the cultural, linguistic and ethnic composition of 
the school community 
c. Implement District-level policies related to wellness. School 
Wellness Councils will annually review District policies 
related to wellness. If applicable, the school wellness council 
will apply strategies to implement these policies. See the 
Index of Federal, State, and Boston Public School wellness-
related Policies & Guidelines section on page 17. 
d. Assess the school’s wellness status. Schools will use the 
following surveys and audits to assess the wellness status of 
school: 
○ Healthy Schools Program Inventory, Alliance for a 
Healthier Generation. 
○ Environmental Health Inspection Audit 


Page 36:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 36 of 102 
 
 
 
○ School Health Profiles, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention 
○ District data, such as the Youth Risk Behavior Survey 
○ Other District priorities 
The Health and Wellness Department will determine on an 
annual basis the exact timeline and process for completing 
these assessments. 
e. Create and Implement a Wellness Action Plan. Schools will 
complete a BPS Wellness Action Plan template and include 
a link to their plan in the Wellness section of their Quality 
School Plan (QSP) by Fall due date. The Wellness Council 
coordinator(s) name and contact information should also be 
included on the QSP. Principals are ultimately responsible 
for the implementation of the Wellness Action Plan. The 
Health and Wellness Department, in collaboration with the 
instructional and operational superintendents will 
determine on an annual basis the exact timeline and 
process. The school will complete this Plan as a Quality 
School Plan, or other academic improvement plans. 
Wellness Action Plans must include goals and school-based 
activities designed to promote student wellness based on 
the results of the school’s Healthy Schools Program 
Inventory, Environmental Health Inspection/Audit, annual 
District priorities, and other appropriate assessment tools. A 
Roster of each school’s Wellness Council will be submitted 
as a part of the Wellness Action Plan template.  Instructions 
and a template for the Wellness Action Plan can be found 


Page 37:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 37 of 102 
 
 
 
online at: http://www.bostonpublicschools.org/hwd 
f. Engaging stakeholders: 
○ Schools must make available to the public and school 
community on their website a list of names and 
position titles (or relationship to the school) of 
individuals who are a part of their school-based 
wellness councils and include the name, position title, 
and school-based contact information of the council 
chairs(s). 
○ Schools must share information on their school’s 
website about how the public can get involved with 
the school wellness councils. 
○ Schools must post their Wellness Action Plans on their 
school’s website to share local school goals and 
activities to implement the policy. 
○ Schools must share a link to the District Wellness 
Policy on their school’s website and send a message to 
families notifying them of how they may obtain a copy 
or otherwise access the policy. 
○ School-based Wellness Councils shall annually 
communicate wellness-related policies so that all staff, 
families and students are aware of the policy 
requirements. 
  


Page 38:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 38 of 102 
 
 
 
Associated Boston Public Schools District departments will 
provide professional development, toolkits, resources, and 
technical assistance to support the implementation of District-
level policies related to wellness. Schools will be able to access 
professional development using the District-supported My 
Learning Plan. Wellness related trainings will be culturally 
proficient by addressing race, ethnicity, and nationality; sexual 
orientation and gender identity; special needs; language and 
dialect; and practical skills in mediating intercultural conflict. 
                                                                                                                           
C. IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES FOR MONITORING AND 
EVALUATION 
  
The Boston Public Schools Health and Wellness Department, in 
collaboration with appropriate District Departments, will be 
designated to ensure that each school, including out of school 
time programs, complies with this policy. Other wellness-related 
policies will be monitored, evaluated, and supported by the 
District departments that currently oversee these policies. The 
District will collect additional data than listed in this section to 
monitor compliance. 
  
To evaluate the effectiveness of policy implementation, the BPS 
Health and Wellness Department and appropriate District 
departments will facilitate school-based surveys and audits 
measuring changes in school environments over time.  Such 


Page 39:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 39 of 102 
 
 
 
surveys include: 
a. Healthy Schools Program Assessment, Alliance for a 
Healthier Generation. 
b. School Health Profiles, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention 
○ Principal Survey (all school levels) 
○ Lead Health Ed. Teacher Survey (schools with grades 6-
12) 
○ Lead Phys. Ed. Teacher Survey (all school levels) 
c. District staffing reports from the Office of Human Capital 
d. Essential School Health Services Monthly Activities Report 
e. School Environmental Audit 
  
To evaluate the effectiveness of policy implementation, the BPS 
Health and Wellness Department and appropriate District 
departments will facilitate anonymous student surveys 
measuring changes in student outcomes over time. Where 
possible, data must be reported by vulnerable subgroups (e.g. 
race/ethnicity, gender, sexual identity) Such surveys include, but 
are not limited to: 
a. Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS): 
○ Middle School YRBS (conducted biennially in 


Page 40:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 40 of 102 
 
 
 
randomized sample of schools serving students in 
grades 6-8 during the Fall semester of even numbered 
school years, i.e., Fall 2013, 2015, 2017, etc.). 
○ High School YRBS (conducted biennially in randomized 
sample of schools serving students in grades 9-12 
during the Spring semester of odd numbered school 
years, i.e., Spring 2015, 2017, 2019, etc.) 
b. School Climate Survey (conducted annually by the Office of 
Data & Accountability) 
c. FITNESSGRAM (grades 3-12) 
d. Health Services SNAPNurse system 
  
As stated above, the annual report shall be presented to the 
DWC, superintendent, the School Committee, and the 
Massachusetts Department of Education, and shared with BPS 
stakeholders. 
 
District Wellness Policy Monitoring & Evaluation Plan 
 
Table Abbreviations:  
PO = Process Outcome; IMO = Intermediate Outcome; LTO = 


Page 41:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 41 of 102 
 
 
 
Long-term Outcomes 
General Policy/Council (GEN) Metrics 
GEN Process Outcomes (PO) 


Page 42:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 42 of 102 
 
 
 
PO1: DWC and Subcommittee Meetings [DWC Records] 
PO1.1: # of Meetings (DWC & by subcommittee) 
PO1.2: # of attendees 
PO1.3: Action Plan completion (yes/no) 
PO1.4: Review Policy (yes/no) 
PO1.5: Hear Stakeholder Feedback through public comment 
(yes/no) 
PO1.6: Update policy (yes/no/not applicable) 
PO2: Policy Communication/Public Notification (yes/no) 
[DWC Records] 
PO2.1: Policy Translation 
PO2.2: Post to BPS website: Policy, meeting times, action 
plan, membership, contact information 
PO2.3: Policy in Parent Guidebook 
PO2.4: Policy update presentations to School Committee 
PO2.5: Policy update presentations to: BSAC, CPC, DELAC, 
SPEDPAC 
PO3: Policy Evaluation [DWC Records/Profiles] 
PO3.1: Evaluation Plan (in place) 


Page 43:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 43 of 102 
 
 
 
PO3.2: Annual Report (yes/no) 
PO3.2.1: Alternating Qualitative & Quantitative Reports 
PO3.2.2: Post to website 
PO3.2.3: Share with Superintendent, School Committee, 
DESE 
PO3.2.4: Sent to parent councils 
PO3.3: Biennial School Wellness Reports [Profiles] 
PO4: Policy Trainings 
PO4.1: PDs for school wellness council and teachers [HWD 
Records] 
PO4.2: Training materials for Principals, Superintendents, 
Central Office Leaders 
PO5: School-based Wellness Councils 
PO5.1: % of schools submitting WAPs [HWD Records] 
GEN Short-term Outcome (STO) 1: Increase awareness and 
knowledge of the District Wellness Policy among BPS 
families, District staff, and school leadership and staff 
STO1.1: % of schools that post WAP, council members, and 
council chair(s) contact information to their website [Profiles 
SY19-20] 


Page 44:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 44 of 102 
 
 
 
STO1.2: % of schools that send a communication about the 
policy home to parents [Profiles] 
STO1.3: % of schools that communicate policy to school staff 
[Profiles] 
GEN STO 2: Improve diverse stakeholder involvement on the 
District Wellness Council, the DWC subcommittees & 
school-based wellness councils 
STO2.1: DWC membership includes representatives from 
families, students, school and District instructional and 
operational administrators, relevant central department 
heads, school food and nutrition services staff, physical 
education and health education teachers, school nurses and 
other school health professionals (e.g. psychologists, 
guidance counselors, social workers) a school committee 
member, community youth serving agencies, Boston Public 
Health Commission representatives, healthcare providers 
and the general public [DWC Records] 
STO2.2: # of public comments made during DWC meetings 
[DWC Records] 
STO2.2: #(%) of school wellness councils with 2 or more 
family reps on the wellness council [WAPs] 
STO2.3: #(%) of school wellness councils with 2 or more 
students on the wellness council [WAPs] 


Page 45:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 45 of 102 
 
 
 
GEN STO 3: Improve policy to align with model school 
wellness policies and best practices, annual report findings 
and recommendations, input from schools and the 
community, research evidence, and government 
regulations. [DWC records] 
STO3.1: Policy updates by area 
GEN STO 4: Increase the number of schools with quality 
wellness councils [HWD Records] 
STO4.1: #(%) of schools with wellness councils that meet 
quarterly 
STO4.2: #(%) of schools with identified wellness council 
chair(s) 
GEN IMO 1: Improve the functionality of the school-based 
wellness councils [WAPs] 
IMO1.1: % of WAPs with SMART Goals 
IMO1.2: % of WAPs goals in each policy area 
IMO1.3: % of wellness council with 
IMO1.3.1: Minimum representation of member roles 
IMO1.3.2: Addition representation of member roles 


Page 46:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 46 of 102 
 
 
 
IMO1.4: % of schools with trained wellness council co-chairs 
Cultural Proficiency (CP) Metrics 
CP Process Outcomes: 
PO1: # of trainings on Equity policy and practices (e.g. Equity 
Protocol, Welcoming Schools, EQT-4) [Equity Office] 
PO2: # (%) of schools that have staff trained on CLSP 
PO3: # (%) of central office departments that have at least 
70% staff trained on CLSP 
PO4: # (%) of staff by school trained on CLSP 
CP STO 1: Increased # of schools assessing organizational 
structure, policies, and school-wide practices for cultural 
proficiency 
STO1.1: # (%) of schools with CLSP goal on their WAP 
CP STO 2: Increased # of schools engaging families, 
students, and community members in decision-making 
[WAPS] 


Page 47:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 47 of 102 
 
 
 
STO2.1: # of family members on school-based wellness 
council 
STO2.2.: # of students on school-based wellness council 
STO2.3: # of community orgs on school-based wellness 
council 
STO2.4: # (%) of schools that engage these groups in 
wellness council 
CP IMO 1: Positive perceived climate around cultural 
proficiency 
IMO1.1: District score on Community Involvement Scale 
[Climate Survey/ODA] 
IMO1.2: District score on Appreciation for Diversity Scale 
[Climate Survey/ODA] 
IMO1.3: District score on Family/School Relationship Scale 
[Climate Survey/ODA] 
IMO1.4: District score on Cultural Responsiveness Scale 
[Climate Survey/ODA] 
IMO1.5: District score on Student/Teacher Relationships Scale 
[Climate Survey/ODA] 
IMO1.6: Parent perception of school climate as safe and 
welcoming [Climate Survey/ODA] 


Page 48:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 48 of 102 
 
 
 
IMO1.7: % of middle and high school students that report 
having an adult at school that they can talk about issues in 
their life [2017 MS & HS YRBS] 
School Food & Nutrition Promotion (SFNP) Metrics 
SFNP Process Outcomes (PO) 
PO1: # (%) of schools participating in the School Breakfast 
Program [FNS Records] 
PO1.1: # (%) of schools using different models of the School 
Breakfast program 
PO2: % (#) of schools participating in School Lunch Program 
[FNS Records] 
PO2.1: % (#) of school using different models of the School 
Lunch Program 
PO3: # (%) of schools with cafeteria staff trained on food 
safety [FNS Records] 
PO4: # (%) of schools with completed kitchen inspection 
[FNS records] 
PO5: # of Healthy Food Environment Wellness Champions 
[HWD records] 
PO6: # (%) of school leaders aware of the competitive sales 


Page 49:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 49 of 102 
 
 
 
policy [HWD Records] 
PO7: # of nutrition education PDs [HWD Records] 
PO8: # of staff trained at nutrition education PDs [HWD 
Records] 
SFNP STO 1: Increase variety of foods that are local, culturally 
influenced, and clean label [FNS Records] 
STO1.1: % of food items procured by the District that are local 
STO1.2: % of menu items that are culturally influenced to 
reflect the student population 
Cafeteria Schools 
Vended Meals 
SFNP STO 2: Increase support of BIC from school 
administration 
STO2.1: #(%) of schools implementing BIC [FNS Records] 
SFNP STO 3: Increase awareness of competitive sales policy 
STO3.1: #(%) of school leaders that inform their staff of the 
competitive sales policy [Profiles] 


Page 50:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 50 of 102 
 
 
 
SFNP STO 4: Maintain 100% of schools with cafeteria staff 
with all required certifications, inspected kitchen, and a 
Hazard Analysis and Control Points plan 
STO4.1: % of schools with cafeteria staff with all required 
certifications, compliant kitchen, and a Hazard Analysis and 
Control Points plan [FNS Records] 
SFNP STO 5: Increase in schools teaching healthy eating 
habits in health education, physical education, and other 
subjects 
STO5.1: # (%) of schools teaching nutrition education through 
Comprehensive Health Education [Profiles] 
SFNP STO 6: Increase in the number of satellite schools able 
to provide bulk, freshly prepared, on-site meal service [FNS 
Records] 
STO6.1: % of schools receiving vended meals 
STO6.2: % of satellite schools that are converted to be able to 
provide bulk, freshly prepared, on-site meal service (In three 
years, all schools implementing My Way Cafe model) 
SFNP IMO 1: Increased participation in all school meal 
programs 


Page 51:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 51 of 102 
 
 
 
IMO1.1: Number or percent of schools with at least XX% of 
students participating in SBP, NSLP, CACFP, and Summer 
Meals Program [FNS Records] 
SFNP IMO 2:  Reduced food waste 
IMO2.1: Difference in weight between food served and food 
uneaten (thrown away) [BOSfoodlove] 
SFNP IMO 3: Increase in schools that do not sell, serve or 
provide food and beverages outside of the school meal plan 
that do not meet BPS nutritional guidelines [Profiles] 
IMO3.1: #(%) of schools where students cannot purchase 
snacks, meals or beverages from school vending machines 
or at a school store, fundraisers, canteen, or snack bar during 
lunch 
IMO3.2: #(%) of schools that sell food and/or beverages from 
school vending machines or at a school store, fundraisers, 
canteen, or snack bar that met BPS nutritional guidelines 
SFNP IMO 4: Increase in student practicing healthy eating 
habits [FNS Records] 
IMO4.1: # of breakfast provided 
IMO4.2: # of milk provided 


Page 52:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 52 of 102 
 
 
 
IMO4.3: # of students choosing/served a fruit 
IMO4.4: # of students choosing/served a vegetable 
Physical Activity & Physical Education (PE/PA) Metrics 
PE/PA Process Outcomes [HWD Records] 
PO1: # of PD opportunities for PE, PA and SRTS 
PO2: # of teachers in attendance at PDs 
PO3: # of IC sessions for PE, PA and SRTS 
PO4: Tools developed for school-based staff (Qual) 
PO5: # of TA sessions 
PO6: # of active PA community partnerships 
PO7: # of PE curricula distributed 
PO8: # of PE equipment distributed 
PO9: # of MS Athletic programs 
PO10: # of HS Athletic programs 
PE/PA STO1: Improve the staffing capacity of schools to 
provide PE according to Policy 
STO1.1: #(%) of schools with PE staff FTE to provide PE 


Page 53:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 53 of 102 
 
 
 
according to policy. 
PE/PA STO 2: Increase capacity of school-based staff to 
deliver high quality PE/PA programs 
School day: PE, Recess, Before/After school programming 
(including sports), SRTS [HWD Records] 
STO2.1: #(%) of schools with PE teachers completed IC during 
last 2 years 
STO2.2: #(%) of schools implementing standards-based PE 
curricula 
STO2.3: #(%) of schools with PE teachers that have 
completed PD for PE 
STO2.4: #(%) of schools with teachers that have completed 
PD for PA 
STO2.5: #(%) of schools with teachers that have completed 
PD for SRTS 
STO2.6: #(%) of schools receiving training on active recess 
PE/PA STO 3: Increase % of schools offering any PE 
STO3.1: # (%) of schools offering any amount of PE classes 
[Profiles] 


Page 54:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 54 of 102 
 
 
 
PE/PA STO 4: Increase % of schools offering recess to grades 
PreK-8 [Profiles] 
STO4.1: #(%) of schools offering at least 20 min of recess for 
grades PreK-5 
STO4.2: #(%) of schools offering at least 20 min of recess for 
grades 6-8 
PE/PA STO 5: Increase % of schools offering before- and 
after-school physical activity opportunities 
STO5.1: #(%) of schools in SRTS program [HWD Records] 
STO5.2: #(%) of schools with MS Athletic programs [Athletics 
Dept] 
STO5.3: #(%) of schools with HS Athletic programs [Athletics 
Dept] 
STO5.5: #(%) of schools offering opportunities for students to 
participate in intramural sports programs or physical activity 
clubs [Profiles] 
PE/PA STO 6: Increase % of schools not withholding physical 
activity as punishment 
STO6.1: # (%) of schools not withholding physical activity as 
punishment [Profiles] 


Page 55:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 55 of 102 
 
 
 
PE/PA STO 7: Increase number of schools that access 
resources, partnerships and supports 
STO7.1: #(%) of schools with partnerships by PA/PE type 
[Partnership Portal] 
STO7.2: #(%) of schools with resources/supports by PA/PE 
type [HWD Records] 
PE/PA STO 8: Improve collaborations between the District, 
city agencies, schools, families and schools around safe, 
active transportation  
STO8.1: # (%) of schools with identified priority walking 
routes [HWD records] 
STO8.2: # (%) of schools participating in Walk to School Day 
[HWD Records] 
STO8.3: # (%) of schools that provide pedestrian safety 
education programming [HWD Records] 
STO8.4: # (%) of schools that provide support for families 
related to walking, rolling or transit [2019 Profiles] 
STO8.5: # (%) of schools represented in requested 
transportation surveys 
PE/PA IMO 1: Increase % of students reporting having PE 


Page 56:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 56 of 102 
 
 
 
[YRBS] 
IMO1.1: # (%) MS and HS students reporting PE one or more 
times per week 
IMO1.2: # of students who receive physical education classes 
(enrollment in PE course; grade on their report card) 
PE/PA IMO 2: Increase % of schools providing PE according 
to BPS policy [Profiles] 
IMO2.1: # (%) of schools (which contain grades PreK-8) that 
are providing 45 minutes of weekly PE for students in grades 
PreK-8 
IMO2.2: # (%) of schools (which contain grades PreK-8) that 
are providing recommended 80 min of weekly PE for 
students in grades PreK-8 
IMO2.3: # (%) of schools (which contain grades 9-12) that are 
providing 1 semester of PE each year for students grades 9-
12 
PE/PA IMO 3: Increase % of students reporting active 
transportation to and from school 
IMO3.1: % of students that report walking or biking to school 
[YRBS] 


Page 57:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 57 of 102 
 
 
 
PE/PA IMO 4: Increase % of schools with grades PreK- 8 
meeting policy for 150 minutes of weekly PA 
IMO4.1: # (%) of schools providing students (PreK-8) with 150 
minutes of physical activity, including at least 45 minutes of 
PE per week and 20 minutes of recess daily [Profiles] 
PE/PA IMO 5: Improve the equity of access to athletic 
programming [Athletics] 
IMO5.1: #(%) students participating in a school sports 
program 
IMO5.2: #(%) of schools offering access to Athletics Programs 
according to the BPS Athletics Criteria for Equity 
IMO5.3: # (%) of schools with equal number of boys’ and girls’ 
athletic teams 
Comprehensive Health Education (CHE) Metrics 
CHE Process Outcomes: [HWD records] 
PO1: # of HE PD opportunities 
PO2: # of teachers/staff in attendance at PDs 
PO4: Tools developed for school-based staff (Qual) 


Page 58:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 58 of 102 
 
 
 
PO5: # of TA sessions 
PO6: # of HE related community partnerships 
PO7: # of resources provided to schools (curriculum, 
instructional supplies) 
CHE STO 1: Increase capacity of school-based staff to deliver 
high-quality, skills-based comprehensive health education 
[HWD Records] 
STO1.1: #(%) of HE teachers trained on CHE curricula 
STO1.2: #(%) of teachers/staff trained on CHE curricula 
STO1.3: #(%) of teachers/staff trained on Sexual Health Ed 
curriculum 
STO1.4: #(%) of teachers/staff reporting an increase in 
knowledge and skills post PD 
#(%) of schools with teachers who received IC 
CHE STO2: Increase number of qualified and trained 
teachers in elementary school and licensed health education 
teachers in middle and high schools 
STO2.1: # of qualified and trained teachers delivering health 
education in Elementary schools 
STO2.3: # of Licensed health education teachers delivering 


Page 59:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 59 of 102 
 
 
 
health education in Middle and High Schools 
CHE STO 3: Increased number of schools implementing 
comprehensive health education curricula for all grades 
[HWD Records/Profiles] 
STO3.1: # (%) of schools with PreK-3 grades that use 
approved curriculum 
STO3.2: # (%) of schools with 4-5 grades that use Healthy & 
Safe Body Unit 
STO3.3: # (%) of schools with 6-8 grades that use approved 
curriculum 
STO3.4: # (%) of schools with 9-12 grades that use approved 
curriculum 
CHE STO 4: Increase the number of schools providing Health 
Education [HWD Records/Profiles] 
STO4.1: # (%) of schools providing HE in 2+ elementary 
grades 
STO4.2: # (%) of schools offering 2 semesters of HE in MS 
STO4.3: # (%) of schools offering 1 semester of HE in HS 
CHE STO 5: Increase number of schools that leverage 


Page 60:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 60 of 102 
 
 
 
resources, partnerships and supports to improve the quality 
of HE [Profiles/HWD] 
STO5.1: # (%) of schools with partnerships to support HE 
teaching [Profiles] 
STO5.2: # (%) of school with partnerships to promote health 
literacy among student and families 
STO5.3: # (%) of schools accessing District 
resources/supports [Profiles] 
CHE IMO 1: Increase in number of schools providing HE 
according to BPS policy [Profiles, HWD records, OHC Staffing 
Data] 
IMO1.1: # (%) of schools with trained BPS teachers teaching 
grades 4-5 Healthy and Safe Body Unit in all classes 
IMO1.2: # (%) of schools with grades 6-8 offering at least two 
semesters of skills-based health education for all students 
taught by a licensed health education teacher 
IM1.3: # (%) of schools with grades 9-12 offering at least one 
semester of skills-based health education for all students 
taught by a licensed health education teacher 
CHE IMO 2: Increased number of students who received 
dedicated health education time [ASPEN/SIS] 


Page 61:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 61 of 102 
 
 
 
IMO2.1: # of students who receive dedicated health 
education time 
CHE IMO 3: Increase Comprehensiveness and Accessibility of 
Health Education Content [Profiles] 
Healthy School Environment (HSE) Metrics 
HSE Process Outcomes: 
PO1: School Environmental Audits [Environmental 
Division/BPHC records] 
PO1.1: #(%) of schools with SEA 
PO2: Green Cleaner Policy 
PO2.1: # of safer sanitizer bottles distributed [Facilities Mgmt] 
PO2.2: #(%) of programs trained to properly use Oxivir 
PO3: Rapid Response [Facilities Mgmt] 
PO3.1: # of custodians trained to properly clean/treat 
outbreaks 
PO3.2: Updated/Improved system for tracking 
illness/outbreak responses 
PO4: Integrated Pest Management Program [Facilities 
Mgmt/IPM contractors’ records] 


Page 62:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 62 of 102 
 
 
 
PO4.1: #(%) of Schools assigned IPM Contractors 
PO4.2: #(%) of Schools with IPM Plans 
PO5: Decluttering Initiative [Facilities Mgmt/Profiles (SY19-
20)] 
PO5.1: Creation of a BPS Declutter Guide 
PO6: Water Policy [Facilities Mgmt] 
PO6.1: # (%) online and offline schools 
PO6.2: # of drinking water units by type 
PO7: Zero Waste Policy [Facilities Mgmt] 
PO7.1: #(%) of Schools with Zero Waste Coordinators 
PO7.2: #(%) of schools with zero waste equipment/bins 
present 
PO7.3: #(%) of schools with book recycling bins 
PO7.4: #(%) of schools with textile recycling bins 
PO8: Communication of HSE Policies [Facilities 
Mgmt/HWD/MassCOSH records] 
PO8.1: Plan/strategy to communicate the Healthy School 
Environment-related policies 
PO8.2: #(%) of school leaders trained on the Healthy School 


Page 63:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 63 of 102 
 
 
 
Environment-related policies 
PO9: HSE Wellness Champion Program [Facilities 
Mgmt/HWD/MassCOSH records] 
PO9.1: # of training sessions 
PO9.2: # of schools participating in the HSE Wellness 
Champions Program 
HSE STO 1: Increase in use of SEAs to identify and address 
HSE improvements 
STO1.1: Track requests generated from SEAs [Facilities Mgmt] 
STO1.1.1: #(%) of repair requested as a result of SEA 
STO1.1.2: #(%) of repair requests completed as a result of SEA 
STO1.2: # of Principals reported reviewing results of SEA 
[Profiles] 
STO1.3: # (# of schools with) WAP goals identified using SEA 


Page 64:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 64 of 102 
 
 
 
[Profiles/WAP] 
HSE STO 2: Increase in the schools with staff using green 
cleaners in classrooms and offices 
STO2.1: #(%) of schools with staff aware of green cleaning 
policy [Profiles] 
STO2.2: % of schools with staff using green cleaners in 
classrooms and offices [Profiles] 
STO2.3: #(%) of BPS Early Ed Programs, after-school 
programs that serve food, and YMCA school-based programs 
receiving and using Oxivir [Facilities] 
HSE STO 3: Increase school capacity to address IPM incidents 
[Profiles] 
STO3.1: #(%) of schools that identified an IPM Coordinator 
STO3.2: #(%) of schools with staff that know how to use IPM 
log 
HSE STO 4: Increase schools implementing systems to 
reduce, reuse, and recycle to decrease waste and clutter 
[Facilities Mgmt] 


Page 65:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 65 of 102 
 
 
 
STO4.1: # of schools who complete declutter initiatives 
# of tons recycled 
STO4.2: #(%) of schools with complete and functioning Zero 
Waste Programs [Facilities Mgmt] 
STO4.1.1: #(%) of schools properly disposing of waste by type 
STO4.1.2: # of tons of waste removed from schools 
STO4.1.3: # of OIIT e-waste requests submitted in one year 
STO4.1.4: # of universal and hazardous waste pick-ups in one 
year 
HSE STO5: Decrease in bottled water needs [Facilities Mgmt] 
STO5.1: #(%) of offline schools returning to online 
STO5.2: #(%) of schools undergoing water infrastructure 
improvements 
HSE STO 6: Decrease in causes of poor outdoor air quality 
around school buildings 
STO6.1: #(%) of schools where staff are aware/promote 
Tobacco Free Policy [Profiles] 
STO6.2: #(%) of schools that limit busing idling to no more 
than 5 minutes [Profiles] 


Page 66:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 66 of 102 
 
 
 
HSE STO 7: Improved building infrastructure to support 
active transportation and active play 
STO7.1: # (%) of playground assessment issues addressed 
[Profiles] 
STO7.2: # (%) of schools that have bike racks or other storage 
systems for students and staff [Facilities Mgmt] 
HSE STO 8: Increase Wellness Champion projects and 
initiatives at schools [HWD Records] 
STO8.1: #(%) of HSE WAP goals 
STO8.2: #(%) of HSE WAP goals completed 
HSE IMO 1: Decrease in infection and illness outbreaks 
[Facilities Mgmt/Health Services] 
IMO1.1: # of infection and illness outbreaks 
HSE IMO 2: Decrease in pest-related incidents 
IMO2.1: #(%) of pest incidents logged, reported, and treated 
[Facilities Mgmt/IPM contractors’ records] 
HSE IMO 3: Ensure water quality, maintenance, and 
promotion 


Page 67:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 67 of 102 
 
 
 
IMO3.1: #(%) of schools getting annual water system testing 
IMO3.2:  #(%) schools with coolers cleaned 
IMO3.4: #(%) of schools that reviewed water policy with staff 
HSE LTO 1: Increase the number of high-performing school 
buildings with grounds that are clean and in good repair 
LTO1.1: SEA Trends [Facilities Mgmt] 
Safe & Supportive Schools (SSS) Metrics 
SSS Process Outcomes: 
PO1: # of Behavioral Health community partnerships [BPS 
Partnership Portal] 
PO2: #(%) of schools using universal screening for mental 
health [BHS Records] 
PO3: # of PDs/ # of attendees 
PO3.1: Bullying/Violence Prevention [Succeed Boston] 
PO3.2: Restorative Justice [Succeed Boston] 
PO3.3: K-12 SEL Standards [SEL-I & SAWS Records] 
PO3.4: Targeted interventions for vulnerable populations 


Page 68:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 68 of 102 
 
 
 
[BHS/Succeed Boston/Opportunity Youth Records] 
PO3.5: MTSS/CBHM [BHS Records] 
PO4: #(%) of schools with Student Support Team [Profiles] 
PO5: #(%) of middle and high schools with EPS liaisons 
[Profiles] 
PO6: #(%) of schools with a Homelessness Liaison 
[Opportunity Youth] 
PO7: #(%) of schools with trained Bullying Prevention 
Liaisons [Profiles] 
SSS STO 1: Increased # of schools trained in BPS K-12 SEL 
standards 
STO1.1: # (%) of schools that have all staff trained in BPS K-12 
SEL standards [Profiles] 
SSS STO 2: Increased implementation of Multi-tiered System 
of Supports (MTSS-B) to improve school and classroom 
climate [Profiles] 
STO2.1: % (#) of schools that offer tier 1 supports 
STO2.2: % (#) of schools that offer tier 2 supports 
STO2.3: % (#) of schools that offer tier 3 supports 


Page 69:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 69 of 102 
 
 
 
STO2.4: % (#) of schools that implement Restorative Justice 
SSS STO 3: Increased targeted interventions for vulnerable 
populations [Profiles] 
STO3.1: #(%) of schools with gay straight alliances 
STO3.2: #(%) of schools providing additional supports to 
vulnerable populations 
SSS STO 4: Increased CBHM implementation fidelity [BHS 
Records] 
STO4.1: Tiered fidelity inventory (measure normed) schools in 
CBHM model use 
STO4.2: # of students screened in CBHM schools, fall and 
spring screening 
SSS STO 5: Increased # of schools with all staff trained on 
bullying prevention 
STO5.1: #(%) of schools with staff trained on bullying 
prevention [Profiles] 
SSS STO 6: Increase in the number of schools with behavioral 
health partner supports 


Page 70:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 70 of 102 
 
 
 
STO6.1: #(%) of schools with a minimum of  3 behavioral 
supports partners [BHS Records] 
SSS STO 7: Increase in schools appropriately staffed to meet 
the mental, emotional, and behavioral health needs of 
students as determined by the BPS staffing criteria for 
school psychologists, social workers, and guidance 
counselors 
STO7.1: #(%) school appropriately staffed according to BPS 
criteria [BHS/OHC Records] 
SSS STO 8: Increased quality of Student Support Teams 
STO8.1: % of schools indicating a “yes” on the following 
Profiles question: “Include the following positions on their 
SST: school psychologists, social workers, guidance 
counselors (for only HS), school nurses, community partners 
and trained classroom teachers” [Profiles] 
STO8.1: % of schools achieving Quality Index TBD 
SSS STO 9: Increased awareness of EPS policy and resources 
for students 
STO9.1: % of schools with an Expectant & Parenting Student 
liaison [Profiles] 


Page 71:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 71 of 102 
 
 
 
SSS IMO 1: Improved system for handling bullying incidents 
in schools 
IMO1.1: TBD 
IMO1.3: # of bullying incidents reported 
SSS IMO 2: Increased # schools with all teachers 
implementing explicit SEL instruction 
IMO2.1: # (%) of CBHM schools with all teachers teaching 
explicit SEL Instruction with fidelity. [BHS Records (SEL 
Instruction tool: fidelity measure)] 
IMO2.2: # (%) of all schools implementing [Profiles] 
SSS IMO 3: Decrease incidents of violence at schools 
IMO3.1: # of students with Code of Conduct Violations 
(violence)/Suspensions [SIS] 
IMO3.2: # of school referrals to Succeed Boston for violent 
offenses [Succeed Boston] 
SSS IMO 4: Increase number of schools with safe school 
climate [School Climate Survey/ODA] 


Page 72:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 72 of 102 
 
 
 
IMO4.1: District score on Sense of Belonging Scale 
IMO4.2: District score on Student Emotional Safety Scale 
IMO4.3: District score on Staff Support Scale 
IMO4.4: District score on Student Physical Safety Scale 
SSS IMO 5: Decrease in crisis/behavioral response requests 
from schools [Health Services/BHS] 
IMO5.1: # of incidents where ambulance or police has been 
called for behavioral health needs 
SSS IMO 6: Increase SEL Skills in students 
IMO6.1: BIMAS adaptive scales (CBHM schools) 
IMO6.2: TBD-District-wide 
SSS IMO 7: Increase in expectant and parenting students 
accessing resources 
IMO7.1: # (%) of schools with EPS liaisons 
using/communicating liaison supports [Profiles] 
Health Services Metrics 
HS Process Outcomes: 


Page 73:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 73 of 102 
 
 
 
PO1: Quality Improvement [HS Records] 
PO1.1: Electronic Medical Record Protocols written 
PO1.2: Formula for staffing school nurses developed 
PO1.3: System for creating a universal scorecard for nursing 
practice 
PO1.4: Nurse support system established 
PO2: Professional Development for Nurses [HS Records] 
PO2.1: #(%) of nurses trained 
PO2.3: #(%) of schools with nurses trained 
PO2.4: # of Nursing PD opportunities by type 
PO3: Nurse Liaison Technical Assistance [HS records] 
PO3.1: # of TA sessions 
PO3.2: # of schools receiving TA 
PO4: School Nurse Direct Services [SNAPNurse] 
PO4.1: # of injury visits 
PO4.2: # of acute disease management visits 
PO4.3: # of chronic disease management visits 
PO4.4: # of visit for treatments and medications 


Page 74:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 74 of 102 
 
 
 
PO4.5: Case management (school nurse/PCP/parent) 
PO4.6: # of screenings/referral/completed referrals 
PO4.7: School Nurse Referrals 
PO4.7.1: # of referrals to HRCs 
PO4.7.2: # of referrals to SBHCs 
PO4.7.3: # of referrals for acute medical management 
PO4.7.4: # of referrals for chronic disease management 
PO5: # of nurse-led school staff training sessions 
PO6: # of Individual and group sessions with students 
PO7: # of health promotions 
PO8: Community partner services 
PO8.1: HRCs 
PO8.2: SBHCs 
PO8.3: # of schools receiving community partnerships by 
type 
PO9: Condom Accessibility [HWD records] 
PO9.1: % of high schools with CATs 
PO9.3: % of CAT members trained on how to make referrals 


Page 75:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 75 of 102 
 
 
 
and provide condoms 
HS STO 1: Increase schools appropriately staffed to meet the 
medical needs of students as determined by the BPS Health 
Services staffing criteria 
STO1.1: # (%) school appropriately staffed according to BPS 
criteria [OHC] 


Page 76:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 76 of 102 
 
 
 
HS STO 2: Increase capacity of school-based staff to deliver 
high quality nursing services 
STO2.1: #(%) of schools with nurses receiving required Health 
Service Professional Develop (18 hour and/or monthly 
exemplar practice) 
STO2.2: # of nurses reviewed using the Health Services 
Scorecard 
STO2.3: # of schools with 90% or greater of immunization 
compliance 
STO2.4: % of Individual Health Care Plans (IHCP) 
STO2.5: % of schools with 90% or greater compliance with 
District physical exam policy 
STO2.6: # One-on-one counseling 
STO2.7: # of nurses receiving National Asthma Certification 
HS STO 3: Improve school-wide awareness for students with 
chronic disease 
STO3.1: % of schools that have all Individual Health Care 
Plans (IHCP) for students with Individual Education Plans 
with required signatures [SNAPNurse] 
HS STO 4: Increase the % of students receiving state-


Page 77:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 77 of 102 
 
 
 
mandated screenings [SNAPNurse] 
STO4.1: # (%) of schools with XX% of students screened 
STO4.1.1: Hearing screening 
STO4.1.2: Vision screening 
STO4.1.3: SBIRT screening 
STO4.1.4: Height & Weight (Body Mass Index) 
STO4.2: # (%) of students with referrals for failed screening 
STO4.3: # (%) of students with completed referrals for failed 
screenings 
HS STO 5: Increase % of students visiting the nurse that are 
able to return to the classroom for continued learning 
STO5.1: % of students returning to their classroom 
[SNAPNurse] 
HS STO 6: Increase the schools with nurse-lead health 
promotions campaigns 
STO6.1: #(%) schools conducting nurse-lead health 
promotions campaigns [ESHS Data] 
HS STO 7: Increase in the % of CATs making referrals and 


Page 78:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 78 of 102 
 
 
 
providing condoms [ESHS Data] 
STO7.1: # of condoms distributed by CATs 
STO7.2: # of sexual health referrals by CATs 
STO7.3: % of schools with functioning CATs 
HS STO 8: Increase the provision of sexual health referrals 
[Profiles] 
STO8.1: % of middle and high schools with nurses providing 
sexual health referrals to students 
HS STO 9: Increase in the provision sexual health services 
[Profiles] 
STO9.1: % of middle and high schools with nurses providing 
sexual health referrals to students 
HS IMO 1: Improved school-wide management for students 
with chronic disease 
IMO1.1: # of dismissals from school related to chronic disease 
[SNAPNurse/TBD] 
Staff Wellness (SW) Metrics 


Page 79:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 79 of 102 
 
 
 
SW Process Outcomes: 
PO1: # of District communications on staff wellness related 
topics [External Affairs/TBD] 
PO2: DWC Staff Wellness Subcommittee co-chairs identified 
[DWC Records] 
PO3: # Subcommittee meetings held [DWC Records] 
SW STO 1: Increased staff physical activity 
STO1.1: % of staff reporting at least 30 minutes of physical 
activity a day [TBD] 
SW STO 2: Increased staff healthy eating 
STO2.1: % of staff reporting eating 5 servings of fruits and 
vegetables in a day [TBD] 
SW STO 3: Increased % of schools with staff wellness 
activities and initiatives [Profiles] 
STO3.1: % of schools with staff wellness as a goal on their 
Wellness Action Plan 
STO3.2: % of schools that answered yes to “In the past school 
year, did your school offer any staff wellness initiatives?” 


Page 80:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 80 of 102 
 
 
 
SW IMO 1: Increase in teachers’ school climate 
IMO1.1: Improve professional community 
IMO1.2: Improve support for teacher development and 
growth 
SW IMO 2: Increased % of schools with an institutionalized 
Staff Wellness Program 
IMO2.1: % of schools with a staff wellness promotion or 
program that took place for an extended duration across the 
year. [Profiles/WAP] 
WELLNESS POLICY LONG-TERM STUDENT IMPACTS 
1. Improve student physical fitness 
a. % of students achieving health fitness levels (Source: 
Fitnessgram) 
i. Health Fitness Zone in ⅗ assessments 
ii. Health Fitness Zone for aerobic capacity 
2. Reduce prevalence of health-risk behaviors among 
students (Source: YRBS) 
a. % of students who have ever had sexual intercourse 


Page 81:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 81 of 102 
 
 
 
b. % of students who had sexual intercourse in the last 3 
months (i.e sexually active) 
c. % of students who had sexual intercourse with four or 
more persons during their life 
d. % of students who have ever been pregnant or gotten 
someone pregnant 
e. % of students who did not go to school because they 
felt unsafe at school or on their way to or from school 
(in the last 30 days) 
f. % of students who carried a weapon on school 
property (in the last 30 days) 
g. % of students who were threatened or injured with a 
weapon on school property (in the past 12 months) 
h. % of students who were in a physical fight on school 
property (in the past 12 months) 
i. % of students who were bullied on school property (in 
the past 12 months) 
j. % of students who were electronically bullied (in the 
past 12 months) 
k. % of students who experienced physical dating 
violence (in the past 12 months) 
l. % of students who experienced sexual dating violence 


Page 82:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 82 of 102 
 
 
 
(in the past 12 months) 
m.% of students who were ever physically forced to have 
sexual intercourse (when they did not want to) 
3. Increase in protective health behaviors among students 
(Source: YRBS) 
a. % of students who used a condom during last sexual 
intercourse (among students who were currently 
sexually active) 
b. % of students who used effective hormonal birth 
control† to prevent pregnancy (during last sexual 
intercourse among students who were currently 
sexually active) 
c. % of students who used a condom and effective 
hormonal birth control during last sexual intercourse 
(among students who were currently sexually active) 
d. % of students who were ever tested for HIV (not 
including tests done when donating blood) 
e. % of students who were physically active at least 60 
minutes per day on all 7 days 
f. % of students who did not watch 3+ hours of TV (on an 
average school day) 
g. % of students who did not play video or computer 
games or used a computer for 3+ hours per day (for 


Page 83:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 83 of 102 
 
 
 
something that was not school work, on an average 
school day) 
h. % of students who ate breakfast daily (in the past 
week) 
i. % of students who ate fruit or drank 100% fruit juices 2+ 
times per day (in the past week) 
j. % of students who ate vegetables 2+ times daily (in the 
past week) 
k. % of students who drank 3+ glasses of water daily (in 
the past week) 
l. % of students who drank 1+ glasses of milk daily (in the 
past week) 
m.% of students who did not drink a soda (in the past 
week) 
n. % of students who did not drink a sugar-sweetened 
beverage† (in the past week) 
4. Improve feeling of school connectedness among students 
(Source: YRBS & Climate Survey) 
a. % of students who have at least one teacher or other 
adult in their school that they can talk to if they have a 
problem 


Page 84:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 84 of 102 
 
 
 
b. District score on student engagement in school scale 
c. District score on appreciation for diversity scale 
d. District score on student civic participation scale 
5. Improve student social-emotional wellbeing 
a. District score on student social emotional health scale 
b. District score on student growth mindset scale  
c. District score on student perseverance and 
determination scale 
6. Improve student mental health outcomes (Source: YRBS) 
a. % of students who felt depressed (sad or hopeless 
almost every day for two weeks or more in a row that 
stopped them from doing some usual activities) 
b. % of students who did something to purposely hurt 
themselves without wanting to die 
c. % of students who seriously considered attempting 
suicide 
d. % of students who attempted suicide 
7. Reduce prevalence of substance use among students 
a. % of students who currently used tobacco products 
(cigarettes, cigars, smokeless tobacco, electronic vapor 


Page 85:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 85 of 102 
 
 
 
products) 
b. % of students who currently smoked cigarettes or 
cigars 
c. % of students who currently used electronic vapor 
products 
d. % of students who currently drank alcohol 
e. % of students who currently binge drank (males 5+ 
drinks; females 4+ drinks in a row) 
f. % of students who currently used marijuana 
g. % of students who ever took prescription pain 
medication without a doctor’s prescription or 
differently from how a doctor told them to use it 
8. Increase prevalence of students with health weight status 
a. % of students with health MI status (Source: 
SNAPNurse) 
9. Reduce in prevalence of asthma among students 
a. % of students with asthma diagnosis 
(Source:SNAPNurse) 
10. Reduce the prevalence of sexually transmitted diseases, 
HIV, and adolescent pregnancy among students (Source: 


Page 86:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 86 of 102 
 
 
 
BPHC) 
a. Incidence rate for chlamydia among Boston youth  
b. Incidence rate for gonorrhea among Boston youth  
c. Incidence rate for Incidence rate for gonorrhea among 
Boston youth among Boston youth  
d. Prevalence of Boston youth living with HIV  
e. Birth rate among adolescent females  
11. Decrease number of medically-related absences among 
students (Source: ODA) 
a. # of medically-related absences among students 
12. Improve school climate for staff (Source: School Climate 
Survey) 
 
III. DEFINITIONS 
  
All students attend a Boston Public School and include but are 
not limited to students with identities that are related to culture, 
race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, and 
ability. 
  


Page 87:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 87 of 102 
 
 
 
Bullying is a form of emotional or physical abuse that has three 
defining characteristics*: 
● Deliberate: A bully’s intention is to hurt someone. 
● Repeated: A bully often targets the same victim again and 
again. 
● Power imbalanced: A bully chooses victims he or she 
perceives as vulnerable. 
*Bullying is different from conflict, fights, or disagreements. It 
must meet the above criteria. 
  
Boston Public Schools Property includes all properties where 
students and Boston Public School staff work or attend class. 
  
Comprehensive Health Education is medically accurate, age and 
developmentally appropriate, culturally inclusive, implemented 
in safe and supportive learning environments where all students 
feel valued, and includes nutrition education.  
  
Comprehensive School Physical Activity Program (CSPAP) is an 
approach by which school Districts and schools utilize all 
opportunities for school-based physical activity to develop 
physically educated students who participate in physical activity 
each day and develop the knowledge, skills, and confidence to be 


Page 88:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 88 of 102 
 
 
 
physically active for a lifetime. Quality physical education is the 
cornerstone of a CSPAP.  CSPAP also includes school-based 
physical activity opportunities; school employee wellness and 
involvement; and family and community involvement. 
  
Comprehensive Sexual Health Education is a planned, 
sequential, Pre-K – 12 curriculum that is part of a comprehensive 
school health approach which addresses age-appropriate 
physical, mental, emotional and social dimensions of human 
sexuality. It should allow students to develop and demonstrate 
developmentally appropriate sexual health-related knowledge, 
attitudes, skills and practices. The curriculum should be designed 
to motivate and assist students to maintain and improve their 
sexual health by delaying sexual initiation, preventing disease 
and too-early pregnancy and reducing sexual health-related risk 
behaviors. It should be medically accurate, developmentally 
appropriate, culturally, including LGBTQ inclusive, and be 
provided by qualified, trained, and certified teachers (Future of 
Sex Education). 
  
Cultural Proficiency: esteeming culture, interacting effectively in 
a variety of cultural groups, using inclusive language, committing 
to continuous learning. 
  
Cyber bullying is bullying that takes place using electronic 
technology. Examples of cyber bullying include mean text 


Page 89:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 89 of 102 
 
 
 
messages or emails, rumors sent by email or posted on social 
networking sites, and embarrassing pictures, videos, websites, or 
fake profiles. 
  
Federally Funded Child Nutrition Programs include the National 
School Lunch Program, National School Breakfast Program, After 
School Snack Program, and the Child & Adult Care Food Program. 
  
LGBTQ is an acronym for individuals who identify as Lesbian, Gay, 
Bisexual, Transgender, Queer or Questioning. 
  
Health Literacy is the capacity of an individual to obtain, 
interpret, and understand basic health information and services 
and the competence to use such information and services in 
ways that are health enhancing (National Health Education 
Standards). 
  
Health Services represents the component of a comprehensive 
school health program that directly services the individual child 
and monitors health trends within the District. It includes both 
the school nurse programs and the school-based health center 
programs. The goal of health services is to remove the 
educationally relevant health obstacles to learning by ensuring 
access and/or referral to primary health care services, managing 


Page 90:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 90 of 102 
 
 
 
chronic disease conditions during school hours, preventing and 
controlling communicable disease and other health problems, 
providing emergency care for illness or injury, promoting and 
providing optimum sanitary conditions for a safe school facility 
and school environment and providing educational and 
counseling opportunities for promoting and maintaining 
individual family and community health. 
  
Nutrition Promotions are strategies, social marketing, materials, 
and oral & written communications that provide methods to shift 
cultural norms toward healthier foods and beverages.  
  
Parent engagement occurs when schools are actively involving 
parents in an authentic partnership with aims of improving 
individual student’s outcomes and school wide initiatives. 
  
Physical Education (PE) is a planned, sequential program of 
curricula and instruction that helps students develop the 
knowledge, attitudes, motor skills, self-management skills and 
confidence needed to adopt and maintain physically active 
lifestyles. PE curricula must align with the BPS PE frameworks.  
PE activities that focus on a single activity, such as swimming 
and dance, count as PE only if it is part of a CSPAP and aligned 
with BPS PE Frameworks. 
  


Page 91:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 91 of 102 
 
 
 
Physical Activity (PA) is a behavior consisting of bodily movement 
that requires energy expenditure above the normal physiological 
(muscular, cardiorespiratory) requirements of a typical school 
day. Recess, movement breaks, promotional activities, and cross-
curricular incorporation are some examples of PA that should 
NOT be counted as PE; PA is not PE and it cannot be allocated as 
PE. 
  
Safe and Supportive Schools create a positive school climate that 
actively teaches positive behavior and engaging in prevention 
activities to promote feelings of security and connectedness for 
students and adults.  
  
Wellness is a process by which individuals move toward optimal 
physical and mental health, regardless of current health status or 
disability, by practicing healthy choices within an enabling 
environment that encourages healthy decision-making. 
                                                                                                                                     
 
 
 IV.  
INDEX OF FEDERAL, STATE, AND BOSTON 
PUBLIC SCHOOL WELLNESS-RELATED POLICIES & 
GUIDELINES 
 
  
Relevant and existing school policies, for which school-based 


Page 92:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 92 of 102 
 
 
 
Wellness Councils and school staff must comply, are referenced 
below. 
  
A. School Food and Nutrition Promotion-related policies shall be 
followed by all Boston Public Schools: 
○ Meals served in Boston Public Schools are in accordance 
with the National School Meals Programs. Federally funded 
child nutrition programs must comply with the nutrition 
standards for school meals, outlined in the Healthy Hunger-
Free Kids Act of 2010. 
○ 105 CMR 225: Nutrition Standards for Competitive Foods and 
Beverages in Public Schools 
○ Mayor Menino’s Executive Order for Healthy Beverages 
○ FNS-01: Food Nutrition Services 
○ FNS-02: Emergency Meal Procedures 
○ FNS-03: Nutrition Policy 
○ FNS-04: Responsibilities Regarding School Food Services 
  
B. Comprehensive Physical Activity and Physical Education-
related policies shall be followed by all Boston Public Schools: 
a. Massachusetts Legislation 


Page 93:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 93 of 102 
 
 
 
○ MGL c. 71, s. 3: Physical Education 
b. District Circulars 
○ HWD-02: Physical Education and Physical Activity Policy 
○ ATH-01: Prevention & Management of Sports-Related 
Head Injuries 
  
C. Comprehensive Health Education-related policies shall be 
followed by all Boston Public Schools: 
○ HWD-03: Comprehensive Health Education Policy 
○ HWD-05: Human Sexuality Education-Parental Notification 
  
D. Healthy School Environment-related policies shall be followed 
by all Boston Public Schools: 
a. Massachusetts Legislation 
○ MGL c. 90, s. 16B Idling of a motor vehicle engine on 
school property 
b. District Circulars 
○ BPS Water Access Policy 
○ FMT-07: Chemical Inventory “Right to Know” Law 
○ FMT-08: System-wide Zero Waste Policy 


Page 94:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 94 of 102 
 
 
 
○ FMT-10: Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
○ FMT-11: Green Cleaners Policy 
○ FMT-14 Hearing Conservation Program 
○ FMT-15: BPS/Boston Public Health Commission 
Environmental Inspection/Audit Program (City 
Ordinance 7.12.1-4) 
○ FSE-06: Student Safety / Health in School Shops, 
Laboratories and Classrooms 
○ HWD-04: Whole School Health & Wellness: Healthy 
School Environment Policy 
○ HWD-06: Tobacco Free Environment Policy 
○ SHS-04: Infection Prevention and Control in School 
Settings 
○ SHS-20: Asthma in Schools 
  
E. Safe and Supportive Schools-related policies shall be followed 
by all Boston Public Schools: 
a. Federal Legislation 
○ Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as 
amended, Title IV, Part A, Subpart 2, Section 4121 - 
FEDERAL ACTIVITIES; 20 U.S.C. 7131 


Page 95:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 95 of 102 
 
 
 
b. Federal Regulations 
○ Education Department General Administrative 
Regulations (EDGAR) - 34 CFR Parts 75, 77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 
84, 85, 86, 97, 98, 99 (b) The regulation in 34 CFR part 299 
○ Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 19641 (Title VI), which 
prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, or 
national origin; 
○ Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 19733 (Section 
504); and Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 
19904 (Title II). Section 504 and Title II prohibit 
discrimination on the basis of disability,5  as referenced 
in the Office of the Assistant Secretary’s “Dear 
Colleague” letter of October 2010. 
○ Title IX, Education Amendments of 1972 which prohibits 
discrimination on the basis of sex, including individuals 
who are pregnant or parenting. 
■ Title 20 U.S.C. Sections 1681-1688 
c. Massachusetts Legislation 
○  SL 2010, c.92: Bullying in Schools 
○ MGL c.12, s.11H: Violation of Constitutional Rights 
○ MGL c.265 s.43: Stalking 
○ MGL c.265, s.43A: Criminal Harassment 
○ MGL c.266, s.37E: Identity Fraud 


Page 96:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 96 of 102 
 
 
 
○ MGL c.269, s.17: Hazing 
○ MGL c.269, s.18: Failure to Report Hazing 
○ MGL c.269, s.19: Schools to provide copy of hazing law to 
students 
○ MGL c.119, s.21: Mandated Reporters defined. 
○ MGL c.119, s.51A: Mandated Reporting explained 
○ MGL c.76, s. 5 An Act Relative to Gender Identity 
○ CHAPTER 188 An Act Improving the Public Schools of 
the Commonwealth 
d. Massachusetts Regulations 
○ 610 CMR 5 Hazing Reporting- Secondary Schools 
○ 603 CMR 33 Hazing Reporting- Higher Educations 
○ 603 CMR 49 Notification of Bullying or Retaliation 
e. District Circulars         
 
○ ACA-18: Attendance Policies 
○ ACA18A: Attendance Procedures 
○ ACA-18B: Procedures for Referral to Supervisors of 
Attendance 
○ EQT-07: Accommodating Employees with Disabilities 


Page 97:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 97 of 102 
 
 
 
○ EQT-05: Employee Reports of Bias 
○ EQT-02: Student, Family or Other Third Party Reports of 
Bias 
○ EQT-01: Non-Discrimination Policy and Statement 
○ EQT-06: Sexual Misconduct Toward Employees 
○ EQT-03: Sexual Misconduct Toward Students 
○ EQT-04: Students and Gender Identity   
○ LGL-11: Sexual Orientation – Protection of Students 
Against Discrimination 
○ FAM-01: School Site Councils 
○ FAM-02: School Parent Council 
○ FAM-03: Middle and High School Student Government 
○ FAM-05: Title I Family Engagement Requirements   
○ FSE-01: School Safety Contingency Plans 
○ FSE-02 Fire Safety Practices 
○ FSE-04 Bomb Threat Procedures 
○ FSE-05 Medical Emergency Management 
○ FSE-06 Student Safety / Health in School Shops, 
Laboratories and Classrooms 


Page 98:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 98 of 102 
 
 
 
○ FSE-07 Public Health and Workplace Safety 
○ FSE-08 Teaching Students the Containment Protocol 
Mini-Session 
○ LGL-01 Hazing Law 
○ LGL-04 School Visitors Guidelines 
○ LGL-05 Racial or Ethnic Discrimination/Harassment of 
Students 
○ LGL-06 Religious Holy Days 
○ LGL-13 Sexual Assault Policy 
○ LGL-15 Student Surveys 
○ LGL-17 Religious Expression in Public Schools 
○ LGL-20 Corporal Punishment 
○ SAF-01 Student Search Procedures 
○ SAF-02 Weapons and Objects of No Reasonable Use 
○ SAF-04 Incident Data Reporting and Release 
○ SAF-07 Metal Detectors 
○ SAF-09 Lost Children Procedures 
○ SAF-11 Sexual Offender Registry Information (SORI) 
○ SAF-12: School Access Control 


Page 99:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 99 of 102 
 
 
 
○ SHS-01: Drug and Alcohol Abuse 
○ SHS-16: Suicide Prevention and Intervention 
○ SPE-03: Physical Restraint Policy 
○ SPE-14: Counseling Guidelines 
○ SPE-15: Discipline of Students with Disabilities 
○ SSS-02: Homeless Students - Guidelines and Procedures   
○ SSS-07: Persistently Dangerous Schools 
○ SSS-18: Bullying Prevention and Intervention Plan 
○ SUP-20: Child Abuse and Neglect 
○ SUP-21: Expectant & Parenting Students 
○ SUP-05: Code of Discipline 
  
F. Health Services-related policies shall be followed by all Boston 
Public Schools 
○ ATH-01: Prevention & Management of Sports-Related Head 
Injuries 
○ FSE-05 Medical Emergencies 
○ SHS-23: Condom Accessibility 
○ LGL-16: Student Health Information 


Page 100:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 100 of 102 
 
 
 
○ SHS-04: Infection Prevention and Control in School Settings 
○ SHS-05: Tuberculosis Program 
○ SHS-06: Immunization Law 
○ SHS-08: Medication Dispensation 
○ SHS-11: Life Threatening Allergies (LTA or Anaphylaxis) Policy 
and Implementation 
○ SHS-12: HIV/AID Policy and Guidelines 
○ SHS-13: Medical Transportation 
○ SHS-20: Asthma in Schools 
○ SHS-21: Diabetes Policy 
○ SHS-22: Automatic External Defibrillator (AED) Use and 
Access Policy 
  
G. Cultural Proficiency-related policies shall be followed by all 
Boston Public Schools 
○ CAO-05: Services to Limited English Proficient Students 
○ ELL-04: Title I Expenditures for English Language Learners 
○ EQT-01: Non-Discrimination Policy and Statement  
○ EQT-02: Student, Family or Other Third Party Reports of Bias 


Page 101:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 101 of 102 
 
 
 
○ EQT-03: Sexual Misconduct Toward Students 
○ EQT-05: Employee Reports of Bias 
○ EQT-06: Sexual Misconduct Toward Employees    
 
○ EQT-07: Accommodating Employees with Disabilities         
  
○ FAM-02: School Site Councils 
○ FAM-01: School Parent Council 
○ FAM-03: Middle and High School Student Government 
○ FAM-05: Title I Family Engagement Requirements 
○ FAM-06: Boston Student Advisory Council 
○ LGL-05: Racial or Ethnic Discrimination/Harassment of 
Students 
○ LGL-11: Sexual Orientation - Protection of Students Against 
Discrimination  
 
 
 
 


Page 102:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-01 
Page 102 of 102 
 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director of Health & Wellness 
Departmen
t: 
Health & Wellness 
Mailing 
Address: 
370 Columbia Rd, Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9698 
Email: 
healthandwellness@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 
 


