Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
HWD-04  
Version 01 
 
 
 
HEALTHY SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
BACKGROUND 
Approximately 20% of Americans go to school every day, with 
many students, teachers, staff, faculty, and administrators in 
aging facilities with deteriorating conditions. Meanwhile, studies 
have shown that the condition and health of the school building 
and grounds directly impacts the productivity and health of its 
occupants. High-performance green schools with healthy indoor 
air quality, acoustical controls, revitalized schoolyards, and 
daylight produce healthier, higher-performing students. A robust 
amount of literature is available for identifying best practices, 
guidelines, and recommendations for achieving healthy school 
environments. — from the Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, to the Environmental Protection Agency, to the 
American Federation of Teachers Union.  
In addition, the Center for Disease Controls (CDC) Whole School, 
Whole Community, Whole Child (WSCC) model states a healthy 
and safe physical school environment promotes learning by 
ensuring the health and safety of students and staff. 
Asthma is one of the leading causes of school absenteeism, and 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-04 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 
 
children with asthma are especially vulnerable in buildings that 
have evidence of environmental hazards that affect indoor air 
quality. The Federal National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institutes 
evidence-based guidelines for effective asthma management 
recommends reducing exposure to indoor environmental 
asthma triggers such as mold, dust mites, pests, pesticides, 
hazardous cleaners, and disinfectants, and exposure to 
environmental tobacco smoke in indoor environments.    
In partnership with the Boston Healthy Homes and Schools 
Collaborative (BHHSC) and the Healthy School Environment 
Taskforce, Boston Public Schools has implemented many of 
these evidence-based guidelines through district policies and 
programs (see below). As a result of the revised District Wellness 
Policy, school-based Wellness Councils, which are focused on 
improving health and wellness of students and staff, will be more 
closely involved in maintaining the healthiest level of indoor air 
quality and environmental health of their school and school 
grounds by working with Facilities Management, outside 
partners, and the school community.  
Considering that Boston Public Schools is the oldest school 
district in the country and home to existing buildings of all ages, 
it is critical that sustained resources, innovative programs, and an 
ongoing focus be dedicated to designing, upgrading, and 
maintaining our school buildings and grounds to fulfill whole-
school health and wellness goals.  
POLICY 
The Boston Public Schools recognizes that healthy physical 
environments are critical to the prevention of asthma and other 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-04 
Page 3 of 8 
 
 
 
chronic and infectious diseases that impact learning. The Boston 
Public Schools is committed to providing high-performing school 
buildings and grounds that are clean, in good repair, have 
healthy indoor air quality and water quality, sanitary and 
accessible bathrooms, and use resources efficiently. BPS strives 
to provide adequate facilities for physical activity that are 
accessible and culturally inclusive learning environments that 
positively impact the productivity, health, and wellness of all 
students and staff. To address environmental risk factors for 
chronic and infectious diseases, each school will receive an 
Annual Environmental Audit to evaluate health and safety 
conditions such as leaks, mold, pests, chemical storage, and 
cleanliness. The district shall maintain a Healthy Schools 
Taskforce (HST) to promote and raise awareness of the health of 
the built environment and ensure continuous improvement of 
BPS healthy school environment policies and programs.   
District departments and all schools, through an Environmental 
Committee or school-based Wellness Council, will comply with 
existing federal and state regulations, city ordinances, and 
District policies related to promoting and managing healthy 
school environments, including but not limited to:  
• Indoor air quality 
• Green cleaners  
• Integrated pest management 
• Trash and recycling 
• Infection prevention & control 
• Tobacco-free environmental policy 
• Environmental inspection/audit 
• Student safety/health in school shops 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-04 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 
 
• BPS water policy 
• Laboratories and chemical Inventory “Right to Know” law 
• Idling of buses and other motor vehicles on school property 
Schools will regularly assess the quality and quantity of BPS 
facilities for active transportation, physical activity, and physical 
education, including schoolyards, and report maintenance needs 
for these facilities. 
IMPLEMENTATION, MONITORING & EVALUATION GUIDELINES 
The Boston Public Schools and the Boston Public Health 
Commission must conduct annual Environmental 
Inspection/Audits (audit) to evaluate the health and safety 
conditions of each school building and school grounds. The 
Facilities Management Department, in partnership with school 
leadership, will take action to mitigate critical issues such as 
unhealthy indoor air quality, signs of pests, leaks, clutter, mold, 
unsatisfactory chemical management, and critical health and 
safety repairs. In addition, the audit results, along with best 
practices in the Healthy School Environment Resource Toolkit, 
shall be used by school principals/heads of school and school-
based Wellness Councils to develop annual environmental health 
priorities and goals as part of the school’s Wellness Action Plan. 
District departments and all schools, through an Environmental 
Committee or school-based Wellness Council, shall comply with 
existing city ordinances and District policies related to promoting 
and managing healthy school environments. Examples of 
relevant and existing healthy school environment policies, for 
which school-based Wellness Councils and school staff must 
comply, are referenced below:  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-04 
Page 5 of 8 
 
 
 
Massachusetts Legislation 
o MGL c. 90, s. 16B Idling of a motor vehicle engine on 
school property 
District Circulars 
o BPS Water Access Policy and FMT- 20 Drinking Water 
Access Circular  
o FMT-07: Chemical Inventory “Right to Know” Law 
o FMT-08: BPS Recycling & Zero Waste Policy 
o FMT-10: Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
o FMT-11: Green Cleaners Policy 
o FMT-13: Respiratory Protection Program 
o FMT-14 Hearing Conservation Program 
o FMT-15: Annual Environmental Inspection/Audit 
Program Conducted by Boston Public Schools/Boston 
Public Health Commission (City Ordinance 7.12.1-4) 
o FMT-17 Volunteer Projects 
o FMT-19 Cleaning and Disinfecting Body Fluid Spills 
o FMT-18: Science Safety in Laboratories and Classrooms 
o FSE-06: Student Safety / Health in School Shops, 
Laboratories and Classrooms 
o HWD-04: Healthy School Environments Policy 
o HWD-06: Tobacco-Free Environment Policy 
o SHS-04: Infection Prevention and Control in School 
Settings 
o SHS-20: Asthma in Schools 
BPS Facilities Department & Boston Public Health 
Commission 
Boston Public Schools will ensure all schools comply 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-04 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 
 
with healthy school environment policies. 
The Facilities Management Department and the 
Boston Public Health Commission will comply with City 
Ordinance (Boston, MA Ordinances, ch. 10 §§ 7-14.1-14.4 
(1996)) by conducting annual environmental 
inspection/audits of each school. They will 
communicate a school’s results to each school leader, 
and publish all results on the BPS website, available for 
review by the public. 
Upon completion of the audit, Facilities Management 
will immediately address critical health and safety 
deficiencies by filing a work order with the appropriate 
division, and they will incorporate other needed work 
at the school sites into the annual budgeting process.  
On an ongoing basis, Facilities Management will 
provide technical assistance to principals/heads of 
school on environmental problems and other building-
related issues. 
School leadership and school-based Wellness Councils  
School administration and staff must actively 
participate in ensuring the school is following district 
policies and proactively manage environmental health 
issues for the sake of their students and staff. 
School principals/heads of school will be responsible for 
reviewing their school’s annual Environmental 
Audit/Inspection results and other related building 
condition resources to develop environmental health 
priorities for the school. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-04 
Page 7 of 8 
 
 
 
Administrators will engage in a collaborative planning effort 
with their school-based Environmental Committee or 
Wellness Council to finalize annual environmental health 
priorities, goals, action steps, and evaluation efforts. 
The Health and Wellness Department, in partnership with 
the Facilities Management Department, will annually assess 
all schools' Wellness Action Plans to ensure school leaders 
and school-based Wellness Councils are taking active steps 
to improve the health and cleanliness of their school 
building environment. 
Wellness Councils will track the progress of improved school 
conditions and evaluate annually what efforts worked best. 
Wellness Champions will participate in their school Wellness 
Councils. 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-04 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director of Health & 
Wellness 
Department: 
Office of Health & Wellness 
Mailing Address: 
370 Columbia Rd., Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9698 
Fax: 
617-635-1502 
Email: 
healthandwellness@bostonpublicschools.or
g    
 
 
Owner: 
Sustainability, Energy, and Environment 
Program Director 
Department: 
Facilities Management 
Mailing Address: 
1216 Dorchester Ave., Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9576 
Fax: 
617-635-9306 
Email: 
Operations-Department- 
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
  
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


