Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
HWD-06 
Version 01 
 
 
 
TOBACCO AND NICOTINE-FREE ENVIRONMENT 
POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
BACKGROUND 
A Tobacco Policy Task Force met during the 2010-2011 school year 
to review the BPS smoking policy and develop recommendations 
for a comprehensive tobacco policy that addressed all tobacco 
products, including e-cigarettes or electronic vapor products for 
the Boston Public Schools. Task force members included 
representatives from Health Services, Facilities, Health & Wellness 
Department, School Safety, teachers, students, parents, and a 
high school head of school. The policy was updated again in the 
fall of 2019 to remain current with language around electronic 
cigarettes and best practices for vaping prevention. 
The Tobacco and Nicotine-Free Environment Policy is motivated 
by the philosophy that every staff person, student, and visitor 
should have the right to breathe clean air in their school and 
work environment and that BPS is acutely aware of the serious 
health risks associated with the use of tobacco or nicotine 
products, both to users and non-users. The policy recognizes that 
the use or promotion of tobacco or nicotine products on school 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 2 of 14 
 
 
 
grounds and at off-campus school-sponsored events is 
detrimental to the health and safety of students, staff, and 
visitors. BPS acknowledges that adult staff and visitors serve as 
role models for students and embraces its obligation to promote 
positive role models in schools, and to provide an environment 
for learning and working that is safe, healthy, and free from 
unwanted smoke and tobacco or nicotine product use, including 
vaping, for students, staff, and visitors. Therefore, a 
comprehensive policy was adopted to prohibit the use of any 
tobacco or nicotine products. The Boston Public Schools have 
prohibited smoking on school property since 1987 when the 
School Committee of the City of Boston first adopted a Smoking 
Policy. 
A Tobacco-Free Environment Policy has been developed to 
comply with and extend beyond the Massachusetts Smoke-Free 
Workplace Law (M.G.L. c. 270, § 22) and Boston’s Clean Air Works 
Workplace Smoking Restrictions Regulation. Furthermore, this 
policy has been reinforced by the Education Reform Act of 1993 
and M.G.L. c.71 § 2A.  This policy is a part of the District Wellness 
Policy (HWD-01) and Healthy School Environment Policy (HWD-
04) and is linked to the Drug and Alcohol Abuse Policy (SHS-01) 
and the Boston Public Schools Code of Conduct. Substance use 
intervention should be a part of a tiered approach that includes 
substance use prevention education for all students as a part of 
the comprehensive health education required in HWD-01. 
DEFINITIONS 
School property: Includes inside and outside both administrative 
and school buildings, sidewalks/walkways, parking lots, 
playgrounds, fields, school buses and other official vehicles, 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 3 of 14 
 
 
 
loading docks, and any other facility under BPS jurisdiction.  
Tobacco and nicotine products: Include but are not limited to 
cigarettes, cigars, cigarillos (or little cigars), clove cigarettes, loose 
tobacco, blunt wrappers, chewing tobacco (chew, dip), or any 
other product not mentioned that contains tobacco of any kind. 
It also includes any products containing nicotine such as 
dissolvable nicotine, electronic cigarettes, nicotine gel, nicotine 
water, or any other preparation of tobacco and any product or 
formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of 
nicotine that is manufactured, sold, or offered for sale, or 
otherwise distributed, with the expectation that the product or 
matter will be introduced into the human body. 
Tobacco or nicotine paraphernalia: Any device used to aid, 
ingest, light, burn, or consume tobacco products, including but 
not limited to pipes, rolling papers, lighters, and matches. This 
also includes the use of all electronic nicotine delivery systems or 
electronic smoking devices, such as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-
hookahs, e-pipes, vape pens, and advanced personal vaporizers.  
Nicotine replacement products (NRP): Products containing 
nicotine as an active ingredient that are intended to help a 
person quit smoking and are regulated through the FDA’s Center 
for Drug Evaluation and Research. Over-the-counter NRPs are 
approved for sale to people 18 years and older. The US Public 
Health Service Clinical Practice Guideline on Treating Tobacco 
Use and Dependence does not recommend NRP as a component 
of pediatric tobacco use interventions. NRPs include skin 
patches, chewing gum, and lozenges. Prescription nicotine 
replacement therapy is also available; the products are FDA-
approved only for use by adults. Electronic vapor products are 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 4 of 14 
 
 
 
not considered FDA-approved nicotine replacement products. 
POLICY 
BPS students shall not possess, use, consume, display, distribute, 
or sell any tobacco or nicotine products or tobacco or nicotine 
paraphernalia at any time on school property, at off-campus, 
school-sponsored events and extra-curricular activities, within 
vehicles located on school property, and within 50 feet of school 
property. 
BPS staff, administrators, or visitors to BPS shall not use, 
consume, display, or sell any tobacco or nicotine products or any 
tobacco or nicotine paraphernalia at any time on school property, 
at off-campus, school-sponsored events, and extra-curricular 
activities, within vehicles located on school property, and within 
50 feet of school property. 
 BPS staff and administrators shall not promote or allow the 
promotion of tobacco or nicotine products, tobacco brands, 
nicotine brands, or any tobacco or nicotine paraphernalia on 
school property, at off-campus, school-sponsored events, and 
extra-curricular activities, or within 50 feet of school property. 
This includes promotion of any corporate name, trademark, logo, 
symbol, motto, selling message, recognizable pattern of colors, or 
any other indication of product identification identical or similar 
to those used for any brand of tobacco or nicotine product 
company, or manufacturer of tobacco or nicotine products 
through the use of any gear, bags, clothing, any personal articles, 
signs, structures, vehicles, flyers, or any other materials. 
BPS will act to enforce this policy and to take appropriate action 
against any students, staff, administrators, or visitors who are 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 5 of 14 
 
 
 
found to have violated this policy. 
BPS staff and administrators will not solicit or accept any 
contributions, gifts, money, curricula, or materials from the 
electronic cigarette industry, tobacco industry, and tobacco or 
nicotine industry, or from any tobacco products shop. This 
includes, but is not limited to, donations, monies for scholarships, 
advertising, promotions, loans, or support for equipment, 
uniforms, and sports and/or training facilities. It shall also be a 
violation of this policy to participate in any type of service funded 
by any of the industries listed above. 
Exceptions/Exemptions: Tobacco and nicotine products, 
paraphernalia, devices, or imitation tobacco or nicotine products 
may be used for the following: 
1. Instructional or work-related activities in Boston Public 
Schools if the activity is conducted by a staff member or an 
approved visitor and the activity does not include smoking, 
vaping, chewing, or otherwise ingesting the product. 
2. Use by an adult (18 years and older) of a nicotine 
replacement product that has been approved by the US 
Food & Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco or nicotine 
cessation product, tobacco dependence product, or other 
medical purposes and is being marketed and sold solely for 
such an approved purpose.  
 
IIMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES 
A. Policy Owner: The Office of Health & Wellness (Policy 
Owner) is responsible for the review and update of the 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 6 of 14 
 
 
 
Tobacco Policy. The policy owner will provide policy 
communication and implementation support and guidance, 
including community resources for cessation and “Tobacco-
Free” signage. 
B. Central Office Administration: School superintendents and 
operational leaders are responsible for informing school 
principals and heads of school about the Tobacco Policy. 
[Central office leader] is responsible for informing all central 
office department heads, supervisors, and building 
administrators about the Tobacco Policy.  
C. Building Administrators (i.e., School Principals and 
Department Heads): It is the responsibility of building 
administrators to ensure compliance with the Tobacco 
Policy at all BPS schools and buildings: 
1. Supervise the implementation and enforcement of the 
policy at the school site. 
2. Ensure that “Tobacco-Free” signs in accordance with 
the Boston Public Health Commission are prominently 
posted throughout the school property. Locations 
must include all entrances/exits to buildings (including 
basement and loading docks), athletic fields, 
playgrounds, school buses/transportation vehicles, 
bathrooms, and teacher lounges. If signs are needed, 
please contact the Office of Health & Wellness. 
3. Ensure that no marketing or promotion of tobacco or 
nicotine products, tobacco brands, nicotine brands, or 
any tobacco or nicotine paraphernalia occurs on 
school property, at off-campus, school-sponsored 
events and extra-curricular activities, or within 50 feet 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 7 of 14 
 
 
 
of school property, including branding on gear, bags, 
clothing, any personal articles, signs, structures, 
vehicles, flyers, or any other materials. 
4. Ensure that any contributions, gifts, money, curricula, 
or materials from the electronic cigarette industry, 
tobacco industry, and tobacco or nicotine industry or 
from any tobacco products shop are neither solicited 
nor accepted. 
5. Inform all staff, students, parents, and visitors of their 
obligations with respect to the policy. 
a. This policy must appear in all student, family, and 
staff handbooks. 
b. Staff must sign that they have been informed of 
the policy. 
c. Inform students and employees how to 
anonymously report a violation to the Boston 
Public Health Commission: 617-534-4718. 
d. Communicate this policy to all visitors, which 
includes vendors and those contracted to do 
work, and those permitted to use the building and 
facilities before school, after school, and on the 
weekends. 
6. Make available information regarding tobacco 
smoking and nicotine cessation options for students, 
staff, and families. 
7. Consider appointing a designee to support the 
implementation and enforcement of this policy.  
D. Boston Public Health Commission (BPHC): The BPHC is 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 8 of 14 
 
 
 
responsible for the implementation of the Workplace 
Smoking Restrictions Regulation. The authority to enforce 
this regulation is held by the BPHC, its subsidiary programs 
or designees; the City of Boston Inspectional Services 
Department; the City of Boston Police Department; and the 
City of Boston Fire Department. Anyone may anonymously 
report a violation to the BPHC. As a result, a school or 
department may receive: 
1. In the case of a first violation a fine of two hundred 
dollars ($200.00). 
2. In the case of a second violation, within 24 months of 
the first violation, a fine of seven hundred dollars 
($700.00). 
3. In the case of three or more violations within 24 
months of the second or current violation, a fine of one 
thousand dollars ($1000.00) for each violation. 
E. School Principals and Heads of School: In accordance with 
the Comprehensive Health Education Policy (HWD-03), the 
school administration must ensure students are receiving 
the minimum health education course requirements and 
receiving substance use prevention education in line with 
BPS Health Education Frameworks and Student Learning 
Outcomes. 
 
F. BPS Staff: In accordance with state law and local regulation, 
all BPS staff are required to follow the Tobacco Policy. The 
success of this policy will depend upon the thoughtfulness, 
consideration, and cooperation of both tobacco or nicotine 
users and non-users. All individuals on school properties 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 9 of 14 
 
 
 
share in the responsibility to and enforcement of this policy.  
1. Do not use, consume, display, or sell any tobacco or 
nicotine products or any tobacco or nicotine 
paraphernalia at any time on school property, at off-
campus, school-sponsored events, and extracurricular 
activities, within vehicles located on school property, 
and within 50 feet of school property. Exemptions are 
made for only the following instances: 
a. Instructional or work-related activities in Boston 
Public Schools if the activity is conducted by a 
staff member or an approved visitor and the 
activity does not include smoking, vaping, 
chewing, or otherwise ingesting the product. 
b. Use by an adult (18 years and older) of a nicotine 
replacement product that has been approved by 
the US Food & Drug Administration for sale as a 
tobacco or nicotine cessation product, tobacco 
dependence product, or other medical purposes 
and is being marketed and sold solely for such an 
approved purpose. 
2. No marketing or promotion of tobacco or nicotine 
products, tobacco brands, nicotine brands, or any 
tobacco or nicotine paraphernalia occurs on school 
property, at off-campus, school-sponsored events and 
extra-curricular activities, or within 50 feet of school 
property, including branding on gear, bags, clothing, 
any personal articles, signs, structures, vehicles, flyers, 
or any other materials. 
3. Do not solicit or accept any contributions, gifts, money, 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 10 of 14 
 
 
 
curricula, or materials from the electronic cigarette 
industry, the tobacco industry, and tobacco or nicotine 
industry or from any tobacco products shop. 
4. Complaints regarding Tobacco Policy violations should 
be directed to building administrators who are 
responsible for following recommended disciplinary 
guidelines.  
5. Anonymous complaints may also be directed to 
Boston Public Health Commission (617-534-4718) 
where school departments and schools may be 
subject to a fine as listed above in section D. 
6. Consult the building administrator, school nurse, or 
the Boston Public Health Commission for information 
regarding tobacco smoking and nicotine cessation. 
7. Substance use prevention education to discourage the 
use of tobacco and nicotine products shall be included 
in comprehensive health education. Staff responsible 
for teaching tobacco and nicotine-use prevention 
must have adequate training and will participate in 
ongoing professional development activities to 
effectively deliver the education program as planned. 
G. School Nurses are responsible for working with the Health 
Services Department to provide local tobacco and nicotine-
use cessation resources at the school buildings.  
H. Central Office: Since youth substance use prevention and 
intervention must be a part of a multi-tiered approach, the 
following central office departments are responsible for 
supporting schools in these efforts: 
1. Office of Health and Wellness is responsible for 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 11 of 14 
 
 
 
providing training, instructional coaching, and 
instructional materials for substance use prevention 
education as a part of tier one comprehensive health 
education. Additionally, the office is responsible for 
maintaining health promotion materials and policy 
implementation support. 
2. The Health Services Department is responsible for 
communicating cessation resource information to 
school nurses and training on the referral process for 
cessation services.  
3. School Operations & Safety Division will communicate 
alternatives to suspension for students found in 
violation of the tobacco policy, including available 
workshops and other intervention programs. 
VIOLATIONS 
Enforcement of this policy will be by school principals/heads of 
school, building administrators, and department heads. Penalties 
for violation of the Smoke-Free Workplace Law will be enforced 
by school officials, the Boston Public Health Commission, and 
their agents. It is recommended that building administrators, 
principals, and supervisors implement disciplinary measures 
consistent with the progressive measures section of the BPS 
Code of Conduct: 
A. Students found in violation 
1. The first violation shall result in one or all of the 
following: 
a. Confiscation of tobacco or nicotine 
products/paraphernalia 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 12 of 14 
 
 
 
b. Notifying student’s family of the violation of policy 
and state law and recommend that families 
contact their primary care physician to discuss 
prevention and cessation interventions 
c. Meeting with appropriate school staff and the 
student’s family 
d. Providing student referrals to available cessation 
programs 
2. The second violation shall result in: 
a. Confiscation of tobacco or nicotine 
products/paraphernalia 
b. Notifying student’s family of the violation of policy 
and state law and recommend that families 
contact their primary care physician to discuss 
prevention and cessation interventions 
c. Providing student referrals to available cessation 
programs 
d. One or more of the following: 
i. Meeting with appropriate school staff and 
the student’s family 
ii. Participation in tobacco and nicotine 
education program 
3. The third violation shall result in: 
a. Confiscation of tobacco or nicotine 
products/paraphernalia 
b. Meeting with appropriate school staff and the 
student’s family 
c. Participation in tobacco or nicotine education 
program. Failure to participate in the education 
program may result in a suspension. 
d. One or more of the following: 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 13 of 14 
 
 
 
i. Community service  
ii. Suspension 
B. Staff found in violation 
1. Staff who are found to be in violation of this policy will 
be subject to discipline up to and including 
termination. 
2. Department heads and building administrators (such 
as principals) shall be responsible for any fines 
administered by the Boston Public Health Commission 
to the school or department, as outlined in section D. 
C. Visitors found in violation 
1. Visitors who are observed violating this policy shall be 
asked to comply with the Tobacco and Nicotine-Free 
Environment Policy. If the visitor fails to comply with 
the request, they will be referred to the building 
administrator or another district supervisory personnel 
available. The supervisor shall decide on further action 
that may include a directive to leave school property. 
2. Repeated violations may result in a recommendation 
to the school principal or building administrator to 
prohibit the individual from entering school district 
property for a specified time. If they refuse to leave, 
school police may be called to have the individual 
leave. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director of Health & 
Wellness 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular HWD-06 
Page 14 of 14 
 
 
 
Department: 
Health & Wellness 
Mailing Address: 
370 Columbia Rd., Dorchester, MA 02125 
Phone: 
617-635-9698 
Email: 
healthandwellness@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


