Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-20 
Version 01 
 
CORPORAL PUNISHMENT 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
Principals and heads of school should remind staff that the use of 
corporal punishment in schools is strictly forbidden by Boston 
School Committee policy as well as by Massachusetts State Law 
G.L. c. 71, § 37G, which provides: 
(a) The power of the school committee or of any teacher or 
any other employee or agent of the school committee to 
maintain discipline upon school property shall not include 
the right to inflict corporal punishment upon any pupil.  
(b) The provisions of this section shall not preclude any 
member of the school committee or any teacher or any 
employee or agent of the school committee from using 
such reasonable force as is necessary to protect pupils, 
other persons, and themselves from an assault by a pupil. 
When such an assault has occurred, the principal shall file 
a detailed report of such with the school committee.  
(c) The board of education shall promulgate regulations 
regarding the use of physical restraint for students. Such 
regulations shall not preclude any teacher or employee or 
agent of the school from using reasonable force to 
protect pupils, other persons, and themselves from an 
assault by a pupil as set forth above in section (b). Such 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-20 
Page 2 of 2 
 
regulations shall require training of all personnel 
authorized to administer any forms of restraint. Such 
regulations shall provide for procedures for notification to 
the department and to the parents. 
Corporal punishment includes but is not limited to the following: 
• Slapping or hitting students 
• Pulling students by their arms, shoulders, etc. 
• Pushing students from one location to another 
• Forcibly causing students to sit down 
• Grasping students by any body part 
Staff may restrain students only to protect students, other 
persons, or themselves from an assault and may only use such 
force as is reasonably necessary to repel such an attack.  Violation 
of the policy and law will result in disciplinary measures and may 
result in the filing of abuse and/or criminal charges. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Office of Legal Advisor Director 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


