Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-18 
Version 01 
 
DISPLAY OF FLAG AND SCHOOL CEREMONIES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Massachusetts General Law requires that a “flag shall be 
displayed, weather permitting, on the school building or grounds 
on every school day and on every legal holiday.”  In addition, we 
are required to ensure that “a flag shall be displayed in every 
classroom...and in each assembly hall” (M.G.L. c.71, §69). The 
important patriotic and historic holidays celebrated during the 
school year place a focus on our responsibility with respect to the 
display of the American flag in all schools and classrooms. 
Patriotic and national holidays offer the opportunity in our history 
and social studies classes to provide instruction about the flag, its 
origin, care, and symbolic significance. This instruction complies 
with State Learning Standard 18 (Principles of American 
Government). In addition, student projects may afford the 
opportunity for students to conduct in-depth research on 
subjects such as the flag and other patriotic symbols, documents, 
speeches, and literature. 
School Committee policy and Massachusetts state law require 
that “public school teachers at the commencement of the 1st 
class of the day lead the class in group recitation of the Pledge of 
Allegiance” (M.G.L. c.71, §69). The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-18 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Court, however, has ruled that although students and teachers 
have the right to a daily opportunity to participate in the Pledge 
of Allegiance, teachers and students have a constitutional right 
not to participate in the pledge. Teachers and students who 
choose not to participate (i.e., recite and/or stand) may not be 
penalized for declining to do so. All schools must comply with our 
responsibility to display the flag and to provide daily opportunity 
for recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


