Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-19 
Version 01 
 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST LAW – CITY EMPLOYEES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Attached you will find a copy of the "Summary of the Conflict of 
Interest Law for Municipal Employees," which outlines the 
standards of ethics and conduct for all city employees. This 
summary was prepared and issued by the State Ethics 
Commission, the state entity charged with enforcing 
Massachusetts’ conflict of interest law, M.G.L. c. 268A. 
Copies of this summary should be distributed to all staff and 
School Site Council members on an annual basis. It may also be 
found at this link: Summary of the Conflict of Interest law. 
All staff should be encouraged to read and be familiar with the 
law so that we all carry out our obligations honestly and fairly, 
and so that our actions are above reproach. Please use the 
attachment to this circular to make copies for your staff and 
School Site Council. 
Annually, every City employee is required by law to sign the 
acknowledgment of receipt of the attached summary via The 
Hub. Alternatively, the employee may return the signed 
acknowledgement to their supervisor for submission to the 
Office of Human Resources.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 2 of 21 
 
Furthermore, every two years, all current state, county, and 
municipal employees must complete online ethics training 
through the State Ethics Commission. New public employees 
must complete this training within 30 days of beginning public 
service, and every two years thereafter. Upon completing the 
program, employees should print out the completion certificate, 
keep a copy for themselves, and provide a copy of the completion 
certificate to Human Resources. The online training can be found 
at: 
Complete the Online Training Program for Municipal Employees | 
Mass.gov 
For specific questions regarding employment and/or individual 
activity under the conflict of interest laws should be directed to 
the Office of Legal Advisor. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 3 of 21 
 
SUMMARY OF THE CONFLICT OF INTEREST LAW FOR 
MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES 
All municipal employees must be provided with this summary of 
the conflict of interest law annually. 
All city and town employees must be provided with this 
Summary of the Conflict of Interest Law for Municipal Employees 
within 30 days of hire or election, and then annually.  All city and 
town employees are then required to acknowledge in writing 
that they received the summary. 
This summary of the conflict of interest law, General Laws 
chapter 268A, is intended to help municipal employees 
understand how that law applies to them. 
This summary is not a substitute for legal advice, nor does it 
mention every aspect of the law that may apply in a particular 
situation. Municipal employees can obtain free confidential 
advice about the conflict of interest law from the Commission's 
Legal Division at our website, phone number, and address above. 
Municipal counsel may also provide advice. 
The conflict of interest law seeks to prevent conflicts between 
private interests and public duties, foster integrity in public 
service, and promote the public's trust and confidence in that 
service by placing restrictions on what municipal employees may 
do on the job, after hours, and after leaving public service, as 
described below. The sections referenced below are sections of 
G.L. c. 268A. 
When the Commission determines that the conflict of interest 
law has been violated, it can impose a civil penalty of up to 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 4 of 21 
 
$10,000 ($25,000 for bribery cases) for each violation. In addition, 
the Commission can order the violator to repay any economic 
advantage he gained by the violation, and to make restitution to 
injured third parties. Violations of the conflict of interest law can 
also be prosecuted criminally. 
1. Are you a municipal employee for conflict of interest law 
purposes? 
You do not have to be a full-time, paid municipal employee 
to be considered a municipal employee for conflict of 
interest purposes. Anyone performing services for a city or 
town or holding a municipal position, whether paid or 
unpaid, including full- and part-time municipal employees, 
elected officials, volunteers, and consultants, is a municipal 
employee under the conflict of interest law. An employee of 
a private firm can also be a municipal employee, if the 
private firm has a contract with the city or town and the 
employee is a "key employee" under the contract, meaning 
the town has specifically contracted for her services. The law 
also covers private parties who engage in impermissible 
dealings with municipal employees, such as offering bribes 
or illegal gifts.  Town meeting members and charter 
commission members are not municipal employees under 
the conflict of interest law. 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 5 of 21 
 
2. On-the-job restrictions. 
a. Bribes. Asking for and taking bribes is prohibited. (See 
Section 2) 
A bribe is anything of value corruptly received by a 
municipal employee in exchange for the employee being 
influenced in his official actions. Giving, offering, 
receiving, or asking for a bribe is illegal. 
Bribes are more serious than illegal gifts because they 
involve corrupt intent. In other words, the municipal 
employee intends to sell his office by agreeing to do or 
not do some official act, and the giver intends to influence 
him to do so. Bribes of any value are illegal. 
b. Gifts and gratuities. Asking for or accepting a gift 
because of your official position, or because of 
something you can do or have done in your official 
position, is prohibited. (See Sections 3, 23(b)(2), and 26). 
Municipal employees may not accept gifts and gratuities 
valued at $50 or more given to influence their official 
actions or because of their official position. Accepting a 
gift intended to reward past official action or to bring 
about future official action is illegal, as is giving such gifts. 
Accepting a gift given to you because of the municipal 
position you hold is also illegal. Meals, entertainment 
event tickets, golf, gift baskets, and payment of travel 
expenses can all be illegal gifts if given in connection with 
official action or position, as can anything worth $50 or 
more. A number of smaller gifts together worth $50 or 
more may also violate these sections. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 6 of 21 
 
Example of violation: A town administrator accepts 
reduced rental payments from developers. 
Example of violation: A developer offers a ski trip to a 
school district employee who oversees the developer's 
work for the school district. 
Regulatory exemptions. There are situations in which a 
municipal employee's receipt of a gift does not present a 
genuine risk of a conflict of interest and may in fact 
advance the public interest. The Commission has created 
exemptions permitting giving and receiving gifts in these 
situations. One commonly used exemption permits 
municipal employees to accept payment of travel-related 
expenses when doing so advances a public purpose. 
Another commonly used exemption permits municipal 
employees to accept payment of costs involved in 
attendance at educational and training programs. Other 
exemptions are listed on the Commission's website. 
Example where there is no violation: A fire truck 
manufacturer offers to pay the travel expenses of a fire 
chief to a trade show where the chief can examine 
various kinds of fire-fighting equipment that the town 
may purchase. The chief fills out a disclosure form and 
obtains prior approval from his appointing authority. 
Example where there is no violation: A town treasurer 
attends a two-day annual school featuring multiple 
substantive seminars on issues relevant to treasurers. The 
annual school is paid for in part by banks that do business 
with town treasurers. The treasurer is only required to 
make a disclosure if one of the sponsoring banks has 
official business before her in the six months before or 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 7 of 21 
 
after the annual school. 
c. Misuse of position. Using your official position to get 
something you are not entitled to, or to get someone 
else something they are not entitled to, is prohibited. 
Causing someone else to do these things is also 
prohibited. (See Sections 23(b)(2) and 26) 
A municipal employee may not use her official position to 
get something worth $50 or more that would not be 
properly available to other similarly situated individuals. 
Similarly, a municipal employee may not use her official 
position to get something worth $50 or more for 
someone else that would not be properly available to 
other similarly situated individuals. Causing someone else 
to do these things is also prohibited. 
Example of violation: A full-time town employee writes a 
novel on work time, using her office computer, and 
directing her secretary to proofread the draft. 
Example of violation: A city councilor directs 
subordinates to drive the councilor's wife to and from the 
grocery store. 
Example of violation: A mayor avoids a speeding ticket by 
asking the police officer who stops him, "Do you know 
who I am?" and showing his municipal I.D. 
d. Self-dealing and nepotism. Participating as a municipal 
employee in a matter in which you, your immediate 
family, your business organization, or your future 
employer has a financial interest is prohibited. (See 
Section 19) 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 8 of 21 
 
A municipal employee may not participate in any 
particular matter in which he or a member of his 
immediate family (parents, children, siblings, spouse, and 
spouse's parents, children, and siblings) has a financial 
interest. He also may not participate in any particular 
matter in which a prospective employer, or a business 
organization of which he is a director, officer, trustee, or 
employee has a financial interest. Participation includes 
discussing as well as voting on a matter and delegating a 
matter to someone else. 
A financial interest may create a conflict of interest 
whether it is large or small, and positive or negative. In 
other words, it does not matter if a lot of money is 
involved or only a little. It also does not matter if you are 
putting money into your pocket or taking it out. If you, 
your immediate family, your business, or your employer 
have or has a financial interest in a matter, you may not 
participate. The financial interest must be direct and 
immediate or reasonably foreseeable to create a conflict. 
Financial interests which are remote, speculative, or not 
sufficiently identifiable do not create conflicts. 
Example of violation: A school committee member's wife 
is a teacher in the town's public schools. The school 
committee member votes on the budget line item for 
teachers' salaries. 
Example of violation: A member of a town affordable 
housing committee is also the director of a non-profit 
housing development corporation. The non-profit makes 
an application to the committee, and the 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 9 of 21 
 
member/director participates in the discussion. 
Example: A planning board member lives next door to 
property where a developer plans to construct a new 
building. Because the planning board member owns 
abutting property, he is presumed to have a financial 
interest in the matter. He cannot participate unless he 
provides the State Ethics Commission with an opinion 
from a qualified independent appraiser that the new 
construction will not affect his financial interest. 
In many cases, where not otherwise required to 
participate, a municipal employee may comply with the 
law by simply not participating in the particular matter in 
which she has a financial interest. She need not give a 
reason for not participating.  
There are several exemptions to this section of the law. An 
appointed municipal employee may file a written 
disclosure about the financial interest with his appointing 
authority and seek permission to participate 
notwithstanding the conflict. The appointing authority 
may grant written permission if she determines that the 
financial interest in question is not so substantial that it is 
likely to affect the integrity of his services to the 
municipality. Participating without disclosing the 
financial interest is a violation. Elected employees cannot 
use the disclosure procedure because they have no 
appointing authority. 
Example where there is no violation: An appointed 
member of the town zoning advisory committee, which 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 10 of 21 
 
will review and recommend changes to the town's by-
laws with regard to a commercial district, is a partner at a 
company that owns commercial property in the district. 
Prior to participating in any committee discussions, the 
member files a disclosure with the zoning board of 
appeals that appointed him to his position, and that 
board gives him a written determination authorizing his 
participation, despite his company's financial interest. 
There is no violation. 
There is also an exemption for both appointed and 
elected employees where the employee's task is to 
address a matter of general policy and the employee's 
financial interest is shared with a substantial portion 
(generally 10% or more) of the town's population, such as, 
for instance, a financial interest in real estate tax rates or 
municipal utility rates. 
Regulatory exemptions.  In addition to the statutory 
exemptions just mentioned, the Commission has created 
several regulatory exemptions permitting municipal 
employees to participate in particular matters 
notwithstanding the presence of a financial interest in 
certain very specific situations when permitting them to 
do so advances a public purpose.  There is an exemption 
permitting school committee members to participate in 
setting school fees that will affect their own children if 
they make a prior written disclosure.  There is an 
exemption permitting town clerks to perform election-
related functions even when they, or their immediate 
family members, are on the ballot, because clerks’ 
election-related functions are extensively regulated by 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 11 of 21 
 
other laws. There is also an exemption permitting a 
person serving as a member of a municipal board 
pursuant to a legal requirement that the board have 
members with a specified affiliation to participate fully in 
determinations of general policy by the board, even if the 
entity with which he is affiliated has a financial interest in 
the matter.  Other exemptions are listed in the 
Commission's regulations, available on the Commission’s 
website. 
Example where there is no violation:  A municipal 
Shellfish Advisory Board has been created to provide 
advice to the Board of Selectmen on policy issues related 
to shellfishing.  The Advisory Board is required to have 
members who are currently commercial fishermen.  A 
board member who is a commercial fisherman may 
participate in determinations of general policy in which 
he has a financial interest common to all commercial 
fishermen but may not participate in determinations in 
which he alone has a financial interest, such as the 
extension of his own individual permits or leases. 
e. False claims. Presenting a false claim to your employer 
for a payment or benefit is prohibited, and causing 
someone else to do so is also prohibited. (See Sections 
23(b)(4) and 26) 
A municipal employee may not present a false or 
fraudulent claim to his employer for any payment or 
benefit worth $50 or more or cause another person to do 
so. 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 12 of 21 
 
Example of violation: A public works director directs his 
secretary to fill out time sheets to show him as present at 
work on days when he was skiing. 
f. Appearance of conflict. Acting in a manner that would 
make a reasonable person think you can be improperly 
influenced is prohibited. (See Section 23(b)(3)) 
A municipal employee may not act in a manner that 
would cause a reasonable person to think that she would 
show favor toward someone or that she can be 
improperly influenced. Section 23(b)(3) requires a 
municipal employee to consider whether her 
relationships and affiliations could prevent her from 
acting fairly and objectively when she performs her duties 
for a city or town. If she cannot be fair and objective 
because of a relationship or affiliation, she should not 
perform her duties. However, a municipal employee, 
whether elected or appointed, can avoid violating this 
provision by making a public disclosure of the facts. An 
appointed employee must make the disclosure in writing 
to his appointing official. 
Example where there is no violation: A developer who is 
the cousin of the chair of the conservation commission 
has filed an application with the commission. A 
reasonable person could conclude that the chair might 
favor her cousin. The chair files a written disclosure with 
her appointing authority explaining her relationship with 
her cousin prior to the meeting at which the application 
will be considered. There is no violation of Sec. 23(b)(3). 
g. Confidential information. Improperly disclosing or 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 13 of 21 
 
personally using confidential information obtained 
through your job is prohibited. (See Section 23(c)) 
Municipal employees may not improperly disclose 
confidential information, or make personal use of non-
public information they acquired in the course of their 
official duties to further their personal interests. 
3. After-hours restrictions. 
a. Taking a second paid job that conflicts with the duties of 
your municipal job is prohibited. (See Section 23(b)(1)) 
A municipal employee may not accept other paid 
employment if the responsibilities of the second job are 
incompatible with his or her municipal job. 
Example: A police officer may not work as a paid private 
security guard in the town where he serves because the 
demands of his private employment would conflict with 
his duties as a police officer. 
Divided loyalties. Receiving pay from anyone other than 
the city or town to work on a matter involving the city or 
town is prohibited. Acting as agent or attorney for anyone 
other than the city or town in a matter involving the city 
or town is also prohibited whether or not you are paid. 
(See Sec. 17) 
Because cities and towns are entitled to the undivided 
loyalty of their employees, a municipal employee may not 
be paid by other people and organizations in relation to a 
matter if the city or town has an interest in the matter. In 
addition, a municipal employee may not act on behalf of 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 14 of 21 
 
other people and organizations or act as an attorney for 
other people and organizations in which the town has an 
interest. Acting as agent includes contacting the 
municipality in person, by phone, or in writing; acting as a 
liaison; providing documents to the city or town; and 
serving as spokesman. 
A municipal employee may always represent his own 
personal interests, even before his own municipal agency 
or board, on the same terms and conditions that other 
similarly situated members of the public would be 
allowed to do so. A municipal employee may also apply 
for building and related permits on behalf of someone 
else and be paid for doing so, unless he works for the 
permitting agency, or an agency which regulates the 
permitting agency. 
Example of violation: A full-time health agent submits a 
septic system plan that she has prepared for a private 
client to the town's board of health. 
Example of violation: A planning board member 
represents a private client before the board of selectmen 
on a request that town meeting consider rezoning the 
client's property. 
While many municipal employees earn their livelihood in 
municipal jobs, some municipal employees volunteer 
their time to provide services to the town or receive small 
stipends. Others, such as a private attorney who provides 
legal services to a town as needed, may serve in a position 
in which they may have other personal or private 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 15 of 21 
 
employment during normal working hours. In recognition 
of the need not to unduly restrict the ability of town 
volunteers and part-time employees to earn a living, the 
law is less restrictive for "special" municipal employees 
than for other municipal employees. 
The status of "special" municipal employee has to be 
assigned to a municipal position by vote of the board of 
selectmen, city council, or similar body. A position is 
eligible to be designated as "special" if it is unpaid, or if it 
is part-time and the employee is allowed to have another 
job during normal working hours, or if the employee was 
not paid for working more than 800 hours during the 
preceding 365 days. It is the position that is designated as 
"special" and not the person or persons holding the 
position. Selectmen in towns of 10,000 or fewer are 
automatically "special"; selectman in larger towns cannot 
be "specials." 
If a municipal position has been designated as "special," 
an employee holding that position may be paid by others, 
act on behalf of others, and act as attorney for others with 
respect to matters before municipal boards other than his 
own, provided that he has not officially participated in the 
matter, and the matter is not now, and has not within the 
past year been, under his official responsibility. 
Example: A school committee member who has been 
designated as a special municipal employee appears 
before the board of health on behalf of a client of his 
private law practice, on a matter that he has not 
participated in or had responsibility for as a school 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 16 of 21 
 
committee member. There is no conflict. However, he 
may not appear before the school committee, or the 
school department, on behalf of a client because he has 
official responsibility for any matter that comes before the 
school committee. This is still the case even if he has 
recused himself from participating in the matter in his 
official capacity. 
Example: A member who sits as an alternate on the 
conservation commission is a special municipal 
employee. Under town by-laws, he only has official 
responsibility for matters assigned to him. He may 
represent a resident who wants to file an application with 
the conservation commission as long as the matter is not 
assigned to him and he will not participate in it. 
b. Inside track. Being paid by your city or town, directly or 
indirectly, under some second arrangement in addition 
to your job is prohibited, unless an exemption applies. 
(See Section 20) 
A municipal employee generally may not have a financial 
interest in a municipal contract, including a second 
municipal job. A municipal employee is also generally 
prohibited from having an indirect financial interest in a 
contract that the city or town has with someone else. This 
provision is intended to prevent municipal employees 
from having an "inside track" to further financial 
opportunities. 
Example of violation: Legal counsel to the town housing 
authority becomes the acting executive director of the 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 17 of 21 
 
authority, and is paid in both positions. 
Example of violation: A selectman buys a surplus truck 
from the town DPW. 
Example of violation: A full-time secretary for the board 
of health wants to have a second paid job working part-
time for the town library. She will violate Section 20 unless 
she can meet the requirements of an exemption. 
Example of violation: A city councilor wants to work for a 
non-profit that receives funding under a contract with her 
city. Unless she can satisfy the requirements of an 
exemption under Section 20, she cannot take the job. 
There are numerous exemptions. A municipal employee 
may hold multiple unpaid or elected positions. Some 
exemptions apply only to special municipal employees. 
Specific exemptions may cover serving as an unpaid 
volunteer in a second town position, housing-related 
benefits, public safety positions, certain elected positions, 
small towns, and other specific situations. Please call the 
Ethics Commission's Legal Division for advice about a 
specific situation. 
4. After you leave municipal employment. (See Section 18) 
a. Forever ban. After you leave your municipal job, you may 
never work for anyone other than the municipality on a 
matter that you worked on as a municipal employee. 
If you participated in a matter as a municipal employee, 
you cannot ever be paid to work on that same matter for 
anyone other than the municipality, nor may you act for 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 18 of 21 
 
someone else, whether paid or not. The purpose of this 
restriction is to bar former employees from selling to 
private interests their familiarity with the facts of 
particular matters that are of continuing concern to their 
former municipal employer. The restriction does not 
prohibit former municipal employees from using the 
expertise acquired in government service in their 
subsequent private activities. 
Example of violation: A former school department 
employee works for a contractor under a contract that 
she helped to draft and oversee for the school 
department. 
b. One year cooling-off period. For one year after you leave 
your municipal job you may not participate in any matter 
over which you had official responsibility during your last 
two years of public service. 
Former municipal employees are barred for one year after 
they leave municipal employment from personally 
appearing before any agency of the municipality in 
connection with matters that were under their authority 
in their prior municipal positions during the two years 
before they left. 
Example: An assistant town manager negotiates a three-
year contract with a company. The town manager who 
supervised the assistant and had official responsibility for 
the contract, but did not participate in negotiating it, 
leaves her job to work for the company to which the 
contract was awarded. The former manager may not call 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 19 of 21 
 
or write the town in connection with the company's work 
on the contract for one year after leaving the town. 
A former municipal employee who participated as such in 
general legislation on expanded gaming and related 
matters may not become an officer or employee of, or 
acquire a financial interest in, an applicant for a gaming 
license, or a gaming licensee, for one year after his public 
employment ceases. 
c. Partners. Your partners will be subject to restrictions 
while you serve as a municipal employee and after your 
municipal service ends. 
Partners of municipal employees and former municipal 
employees are also subject to restrictions under the 
conflict of interest law. If a municipal employee 
participated in a matter, or if he has official responsibility 
for a matter, then his partner may not act on behalf of 
anyone other than the municipality or provide services as 
an attorney to anyone but the city or town in relation to 
the matter. 
Example: While serving on a city's historic district 
commission, an architect reviewed an application to get 
landmark status for a building. His partners at his 
architecture firm may not prepare and sign plans for the 
owner of the building or otherwise act on the owner's 
behalf in relation to the application for landmark status. 
In addition, because the architect has official 
responsibility as a commissioner for every matter that 
comes before the commission, his partners may not 


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 20 of 21 
 
communicate with the commission or otherwise act on 
behalf of any client on any matter that comes before the 
commission during the time that the architect serves on 
the commission. 
Example: A former town counsel joins a law firm as a 
partner. Because she litigated a lawsuit for the town, her 
new partners cannot represent any private clients in the 
lawsuit for one year after her job with the town ended. 
 
 
This summary is not intended to be legal advice and, because it is 
a summary, it does not mention every provision of the conflict 
law that may apply in a particular situation. Our website, 
http://www.mass.gov/ethics contains further information about 
how the law applies in many situations. You can also contact the 
Commission's Legal Division via our website, by telephone, or by 
letter. Our contact information is at the top of this document. 
 
Version 7:  Revised May 20, 2022  
 
 


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-19 
Page 21 of 21 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF RECEIPT OF SUMMARY OF THE 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST LAW FOR MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES 
I, (print your first and last name): 
 _________________________________________________________________ , 
an employee at (name of your municipal agency or department):  
 _________________________________________________________________ , 
 
hereby acknowledge that I received a copy of the summary of 
the Conflict Of Interest Law for municipal employees, revised May 
20, 2022.  
 
Signature_____________________________________Date ______________  
Municipal employees should complete the acknowledgment of 
receipt and return it to the individual who provided them with a 
copy of the summary. Alternatively, municipal employees may 
send an email acknowledging receipt of the summary to the 
individual who provided them with a copy of it. 


