Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-09 
Version 01 
 
POLITICAL ACTIVITY BY PUBLIC EMPLOYEES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Public employees have most of the same rights as other citizens 
to engage in private political activity.  However, the conflict of 
interest law, M.G.L. c. 268A, restricts some political activity of 
public employees.  In addition, the campaign finance law, M.G.L. 
c. 55, restricts public employees’ political fundraising.  
PROHIBITED ACTIVITY 
The following restrictions are imposed by law on public 
employees and volunteers with respect to their participation in 
political activity whether on the local, state, or federal level. 
1. Participation in Political Activity 
• “Political activity” includes, but is not limited to, any activity 
that is in support of or in opposition to a federal, state, or 
local candidate or political party or a state or local ballot 
question. 
• In general, a public employee may not use their public 
position to engage in political activity. 
• Public employees may not participate in political activity: 
o during their usual business hours 
o while acting in an official capacity or while in official 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-09 
Page 2 of 6 
 
uniform   
o with the use of other public facilities or property and 
resources, such as staff time, public office space and 
facilities, public office equipment such as telephones 
and other communications equipment, computers, 
copiers, public websites and links to public websites, or 
public office supplies such as official stationery   
• Partisan political and campaign activity may be conducted 
by an employee only during non-business hours, including 
usual lunch hour, vacation time, personal time, or during a 
leave of absence without pay. 
2. Prohibitions Against Public Employees Soliciting Political 
Contributions 
It is a violation of state law for a public employee directly or 
indirectly to solicit or receive any contributions or anything of 
value for any political purpose, at any time — during both 
working and non-working hours. 
No person employed for compensation, other than an elected 
officer, by the commonwealth or any county, city or town shall 
directly or indirectly solicit or receive any gift, payment, 
contribution, assessment, subscription, or promise of money or 
other thing of value for the political campaign purposes of any 
candidate for public office or of any political committee, or for 
any political purpose whatever (Mass.  G.L. c. 55, Section 13, 
emphasis added). 
The principles supporting this prohibition — primarily to insulate 
public employees from inappropriate political pressures and in 
turn to ensure that employees do not use their public positions 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-09 
Page 3 of 6 
 
for personal or political gain — are important and must be 
strongly protected. 
This prohibition includes both direct and indirect solicitation: 
• A public employee may not ask any individual for a 
contribution on behalf of a political candidate or committee. 
• A public employee may not encourage an individual to 
contribute to a candidate for public or political office or to a 
political committee or sign a fundraising letter or 
advertisement on behalf of a candidate or political 
fundraising event. 
• A public employee may not sponsor or allow the use of their 
name on an invitation to a fundraising event or on a political 
fundraising request. 
• A public employee may not serve as a host or sponsor of a 
political fundraising event. 
• A public employee may not distribute or sell tickets to 
political fundraising events. 
It should be noted that Mass. G.L. c. 55, Section 7A, does permit 
public employees, as individuals, to make financial contributions 
to political campaigns. 
3. Solicitation In a Public Building 
No one may solicit a political contribution in a public building.  
Solicitations include requests for, or receipt of, a contribution and 
the distribution of fundraising letters or tickets.  Any public 
employee convicted of such solicitation of funds may be removed 
from employment without a hearing (Mass. G.L. c. 55, Section 14). 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-09 
Page 4 of 6 
 
4. Public Employees Seeking Elective Office 
Public employees seeking elective office may not solicit political 
contributions either directly or indirectly. 
Any of the prohibitions against solicitation, which apply to public 
employees, in general also apply to a public employee who is 
themself a candidate for political office.  Moreover, there are 
other restrictions which apply: 
• A public employee seeking office may attend an event held 
on their behalf by a non-elected committee, but may not 
encourage contributions, directly or indirectly. 
• A public employee seeking public office may not give 
permission to have their name appear on such invitation as 
the one who encourages contributions by an individual. 
PERMITTED ACTIVITY  
In general, public employees of all types may engage in private 
political activity, subject to the restrictions on political 
fundraising imposed by G.L. c. 55.  The conflict of interest law 
does not prohibit a public employee from engaging in political 
activity on their own time, using their own or other private 
resources, and when they are acting as an individual and not as 
an agent or representative of anyone else. 
INFORMATION 
• Elected and Policy-Making Officials:  The restrictions on 
public employee political activity are not the same for all 
public positions.  Elected officials may engage in more 
political activity than appointed officials and 
employees.  Public employees who hold policy-making 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-09 
Page 5 of 6 
 
positions have more leeway to make public statements and 
to take official action on political issues than do non-
policymakers.  Employees are encouraged to contact the 
Office of Legal Advisor with questions. 
• Campaign Finance:  Employees seeking information on 
particular questions are encouraged to call the 
Massachusetts Office of Campaign and Political Finance 
(OCPF). 
• Conflict of Interest:  Employees may refer to State Ethics 
Commission’s Advisory No. 11-1, entitled “Public Employee 
Political Activity,” a copy of which can be obtained by 
clicking this link:   
State Ethics Commission Advisory 11-1: Public Employee 
Political Activity | Mass.gov 
For information on campaign contributions and expenditures, 
please see G.L. c. 55. 
ENFORCEMENT 
The City intends to ensure that the legal restrictions on political 
activity by public employees are fully enforced.  This bulletin 
should serve as notice to public employees of the City of such 
restrictions and their implications. 
 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-09 
Page 6 of 6 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


