Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-16 
Version 01 
 
STUDENT HEALTH INFORMATION 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
State and federal laws and regulations dealing with the 
confidentiality of student record information recognize that 
student health information is treated differently from other 
student record information. It should be noted that the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, also known as 
HIPAA, does not apply to student records, with some exceptions 
not germane to this policy. See 65 Fed. Reg. 82805 (2000).  
School health personnel may have access to student health 
records when such access is required in the performance of their 
official duties. See 603 Code Mass. Regs. §23.07 (4)(h). Of course, a 
parent/guardian, or in some circumstances the student, may 
consent to the release of student health record information to 
school personnel generally. In the absence of such informed 
written consent, however, the following standards should apply 
to a determination of which school officials may access what 
parts of a student’s health record. In the first instance, such 
determinations should be made by the building administrator in 
consultation with the school-based nurse. If a disagreement 
arises, such concerns should be brought to the attention of the 
senior director of Health Services for resolution. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-16 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
The following guidelines should be used: 
1. Routine medical information. Such student health information 
should be disseminated only as is appropriate to meet the 
regular and effective educational mission of the school. Such 
information may include information contained in an IEP or 
504 Plan, previously scheduled medical appointments, health-
related incidents that may require or necessitate further 
reporting, dispensation of medications, and conditions such as 
food allergies, seizures, and asthma. In all events, only the 
minimum necessary health record information should be 
disclosed. Thus, the type of medications dispensed would, 
absent more, not be disclosed in the above example. The fact 
that a medical appointment necessitating early dismissal is 
with a psychiatrist would also not normally be disclosed as a 
matter of routine medical information. 
Routine medical information is information that is appropriate 
for certain staff to know in order to maximize the safety for 
children. For example, a child with diabetes needs to have 
teachers who are knowledgeable about the illness so the child 
may have a safe learning environment. Low blood sugar can 
also affect the child’s ability to concentrate. In this 
circumstance it would be appropriate to notify all the child’s 
teachers individually. Health information should never be 
circulated by an all-staff memo. 
2. 
Medical information of limited dissemination. This is student 
health information that is of a confidential nature and yet is of 
little educational benefit in the school. This is specific 
information that the Student Support Team needs to know to 
provide accommodations. When possible, all diagnoses, 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-16 
Page 3 of 4 
 
especially those related to mental health, should be 
expressed as a functional diagnosis. For example, it should be 
enough for the team to know that a child who is depressed is 
getting counseling. The details of the diagnosis or the causes 
of the depression are not relevant to the team’s provision of 
accommodations. The nurse provides the connection with 
the provider to interpret the medical information or when 
clarification is required. 
3. 
Highly sensitive information. This is student health 
information of a highly sensitive nature that has no bearing 
on educational achievement and is of no educational use or 
consequence and in which a high expectation of privacy 
exists for students and/or parents or guardians. Such 
information may include: suicide attempts, treatment for 
drug or alcohol abuse, mental health diagnoses, family 
planning information, maternity/paternity tests or 
information, abortions, or HIV infection. This information is of 
two types: (1) no accommodations or safety issues and (2) 
highly sensitive information.  
Medical diagnoses that have no relevance to a student’s 
performance do not need to be shared. For example, a child 
in therapy who is depressed but not suicidal and who is 
performing well in school, does not need to have this 
information shared with the school community. There are 
also highly sensitive medical situations that are protected by 
state regulations. These include HIV and a minor’s right to 
seek medical care for pregnancy, sexually transmitted 
diseases, and substance abuse, without their parents’ 
consent. Any inclusion of this information in the educational 
record is a violation of the adolescent’s right to privacy. With 
HIV, the student/family can choose to disclose and can limit 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-16 
Page 4 of 4 
 
the individuals to disclose to. In some circumstances, such 
information is of such a private nature that even 
dissemination to a parent or guardian is prohibited.  
Questions in this regard should be directed to the Office of 
Legal Advisor. Such highly sensitive health information 
should, whenever possible, be segregated from the rest of a 
student’s health information to reduce the chance of 
inadvertent disclosure.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Legal Advisor 
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


