Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
LGL-17 
Version 01 
 
RELIGIOUS EXPRESSION IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Massachusetts General Laws chapter 71, section 82, sets forth the 
law regarding the right of students to freedom of expression in 
public schools. Freedom of expression must be balanced with 
any disruption or disorder caused to the school.  Issues related 
specifically to religious expression in public schools involve 
constantly developing concepts and questions of constitutional 
law. Therefore, staff members are strongly encouraged to bring 
specific questions of religious expression to the Office of Legal 
Advisor, 617-635-9320. 
Some general principles include: 
• Freedom of expression of individuals or groups of 
students includes the right to express their views through 
speech, symbols, peaceable and planned assembly, and 
written publications. 
• Although the First Amendment forbids religious activity 
that is sponsored by the government, it protects religious 
activity initiated by private individuals that is non-
disruptive, including student prayer before meals or 
during non-instructional time.  Such non-disruptive 
religious activity may also include speakers at student 
assemblies, extracurricular events, or graduation 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular LGL-17 
Page 2 of 2 
 
ceremonies who are selected on the basis of genuinely 
neutral, evenhanded criteria and who retain control over 
the content of their expression.  Under such 
circumstances, school officials may make neutral 
disclaimers that the speech is the speaker’s view and not 
of the school. 
• Teachers, administrators, and other school employees 
who, when acting in their official capacities, are acting as 
agents of the state and must not encourage, discourage, 
or participate in prayer or other religious expression. 
(Note: this does not include the Pledge of Allegiance, 
which is not considered religious expression; see Supt. 
Circular LGL-18.) 
• School officials may not compel students to participate in 
prayer or other religious activities. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Lisa Maki 
Department: 
Office Of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


