Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
ODA-01 
Version 01 
 
 
PROCEDURES FOR CONDUCTING EDUCATIONAL 
RESEARCH 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The purpose of this circular is to define the policy and procedures 
for conducting educational research in the Boston Public 
Schools. 
OVERVIEW 
The mission of the Boston Public Schools’ Office of Data and 
Accountability is to serve the BPS community by facilitating 
access to quality information and building capacity to make data-
driven decisions that advance educational equity, opportunity, 
and achievement for all students. Research is one way to 
facilitate our community’s access to quality information. It is the 
responsibility of the Office of Data and Accountability to ensure 
that researchers have access to quality data and can responsibly 
interpret the results. As such, the Office of Data and 
Accountability reviews and approves research that works to 
advance educational equity, opportunity, and achievement for all 
students by ensuring responsible access to and use of quality 
data. 
All research activities must be coordinated through the Office of 
Data and Accountability’s BPS Research Team. ODA approval is 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-01,  
Page 2 of 4 
 
not required for research that uses data that is publicly available 
sources such as on the BPS public website. A list of current 
sources of publicly available data can be found in the appendix of 
the Policy and Guidelines document. In these instances, the 
researcher may use the data presented from these sources as 
long as the sources are cited, and any modifications or analysis 
done by the researcher are clearly delineated. Approval by the 
researcher’s IRB and/or BPS school leaders does NOT guarantee 
approval of research proposals by the BPS Office of Data and 
Accountability (ODA). While research may be approved by ODA, 
BPS school leaders have the final say in whether their particular 
school will participate in any given study. 
WHO MAY CONDUCT RESEARCH 
Any academic or professional organization or any individual 
doing doctoral work may submit a proposal to conduct research 
with the Office of Data and Accountability in BPS. Doctoral 
candidates must submit written evidence that their proposed 
research has been approved by their university’s IRB and will be 
supervised by their advisor(s). 
WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF THE RESEARCH TEAM REVIEW? 
While it is necessary for all research submissions to have an 
approved/exempted IRB decision from their own institution, BPS 
requires that all research is submitted to the BPS Research Team 
for review prior to BPS approval. The BPS research review is not 
duplicative of the IRB process and aims to ensure the following: 
● The research is aligned with district priorities. 
● The research follows federal and local guidelines 
regarding conducting research with human subjects in 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-01,  
Page 3 of 4 
 
school settings (This includes consent forms for all 
research participants; assurance that students receive no 
incentives of monetary value for students and not to 
exceed $50 for teachers; voluntary participation for all 
research subjects). 
● The research is not overly burdensome to classrooms and 
is new research that will advance the aims of the district. 
● The research is fully supported by an internal BPS staff 
member (district sponsor) who is committed to using the 
result of the research. 
WHAT ARE THE STEPS TO CONDUCTING RESEARCH IN THE 
BPS? 
1. Submit a research proposal adhering to the Guidelines and 
Procedures. In general, the research submission and review 
calendar is as follows: 
Review Period Submission 
Month 
Review Month Decision Letter 
Sent 
P1 
June 1-30 
July 1-31 
Mid-August 
P2 
October 1-31 
November 1-30 Mid-December 
2. For primary research (i.e., interviewing, focus groups, 
observations, and in-person surveys), each researcher needs 
to have submitted and passed a CORI check. 
3. For secondary research (i.e., requesting administrative data: 
records that are maintained by the school district), 
researchers need to submit a data request and sign a 
standard NDA template. NOTE: for some administrative data 
requests, a fee will be assessed to assist in the fulfillment of 
the data pull.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ODA-01,  
Page 4 of 4 
 
4. Submit policy brief updates annually to your district sponsor 
and the Research Team 
(research@bostonpublicschools.org). 
5. Annually renew your research proposal with the BPS 
research team.  
6. For continuing research, the following needs to be 
submitted: 
a. Cover page describing research activities already 
conducted and proposed changes to the study for the 
next year 
b. Most recent policy brief describing interim findings 
c. Updated district sponsor letter 
d. Updated IRB approval for next year of research 
7. Submit a final report and policy brief (template) for review to 
research@bostonpublicschools.org once the study has been 
finalized. The study is officially finalized once the final report 
and policy brief have been approved. 
For additional information about this circular and the 
application process, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Executive Director 
Department: 
Office of Data and Accountability 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9450 
Email: 
all-acad-division@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


