Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
OIIT-01 
Version 01 
 
ACCEPTABLE USE POLICY AND GUIDELINES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
Guidelines for Implementation of Acceptable Use Policy for 
Digital Information, Communication, and Technology Resources 
SCOPE OF POLICY 
Boston Public Schools (BPS) provides access to technology 
devices, Internet, and data systems to employees and students 
for educational and business purposes.  This Acceptable Use 
Policy (AUP) governs all electronic activity of employees using 
and accessing the district’s technology, internet, and data 
systems regardless of the user’s physical location. 
GUIDING PRINCIPLES 
• Online tools, including social media, should be used in our 
classrooms, schools, and central offices to increase 
community engagement, staff and student learning, and 
core operational efficiency. 
• BPS has a legal and moral obligation to protect the personal 
data of our students, families, and staff. 
• BPS should provide a baseline set of policies and structures 
to allow schools to implement technology in ways that meet 
the needs of their students. All students, families, and staff 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 2 of 13 
 
must know their rights and responsibilities outlined in the 
Acceptable Use Policy and government regulations. 
• Nothing in this policy shall be read to limit an individual’s 
constitutional rights to freedom of speech or expression or 
to restrict an employee’s ability to engage in concerted, 
protected activity with fellow employees regarding the 
terms and conditions of their employment.   
COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENT FOR EMPLOYEES 
The Acceptable Use Policy is reviewed annually by the BPS Chief 
Information Officer and is issued via the Superintendent’s 
Circular.  Technology users are required to verify that they have 
read and will abide by the Acceptable Use Policy annually. 
STUDENT AUP & CONTRACT 
Copies of the Acceptable Use Policy and the student contract for 
Internet use are included in the Guide to Boston Public Schools 
for Families & Students, given to all students at the beginning of 
the school year. The Student Contract for Internet Use must be 
completed and signed by all students and their parent/guardian 
after going over the AUP together. The signed contract must be 
returned to the school before the student may begin using the 
Internet.  
CONSEQUENCES OF BREACH OF POLICY 
Use of all BPS technology resources is a privilege, not a right. By 
using BPS internet systems and devices, the user agrees to follow 
all BPS regulations, policies, and guidelines.  Students and staff 
are encouraged to report misuse or breach of protocols to 
appropriate personnel, including building administrators, direct 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 3 of 13 
 
supervisors, and the Office of Instructional and Information 
Technology (OIIT).  Abuse of these privileges may result in one or 
more of the following consequences: 
• Suspension or cancellation of use or access privileges. 
• Payments for damages or repairs. 
• Discipline under appropriate School Department policies, up 
to and including termination of employment, subject to any 
collective bargaining obligations. 
• Liability under applicable civil or criminal laws. 
DEFINITIONS 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) - The FOIA is a law that allows 
for the release of government documents at the request of an 
individual. A FOIA request can be made to the Boston Public 
Schools for electronic documents/communications stored or 
transmitted through district systems unless that information 
could be detrimental to governmental or personal interests. For 
more information, visit http://www.foia.gov/ 
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) - The FERPA 
law protects the privacy, accuracy, and release of information for 
students and families of the Boston Public Schools. Personal 
information stored or transmitted by agents of the Boston Public 
Schools must abide by FERPA laws and the BPS is required to 
protect the integrity and security of student and family 
information. For more information, visit 
http://www.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/fpco/ferpa/index.html 
Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA) - Requires schools that 
receive federal funding through the E-Rate program to protect 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 4 of 13 
 
students from content deemed harmful or inappropriate. The 
Boston Public Schools is required to filter internet access for 
inappropriate content, monitor the internet usage of minors, and 
provide education to students and staff on safe and appropriate 
online behavior. 
COMMUNICATION & SOCIAL MEDIA 
Employees and students are provided with district email 
accounts and online tools to improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of communication, both within the organization 
and with the broader community. Communication should be 
consistent with professional practices used for all 
correspondence. When using online tools, members of the BPS 
community will use appropriate behavior: 
a) when acting as a representative or employee of the Boston 
Public Schools. 
b) when the communication impacts or is likely to impact the 
classroom or working environment in the Boston Public 
Schools. 
All communication sent by an employee using district property 
or regarding district business could be subjected to public access 
requests submitted through Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). 
Users need to be aware that data and other material/files 
maintained on the school district’s systems may be subject to 
review, disclosure, or discovery. Use of personal email accounts 
and communication tools to conduct school business is strongly 
discouraged and may open an individual’s personal account to 
be subject to FOIA inquiries. BPS will cooperate fully with local, 
state, and federal authorities in any investigation concerning or 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 5 of 13 
 
related to any illegal activities or activities not in compliance with 
school district policies or government regulations. 
GUIDELINES FOR ONLINE COMMUNICATION 
• Communication with students should not include content 
of a personal nature. 
• When communicating with parents/guardians of students, 
employees should use email addresses and phone numbers 
listed in the Student Information System (SIS) unless steps 
have been taken to verify that the communication is 
occurring with a parent/guardian that has educational 
rights for the student. 
• When communicating with a parent/guardian, refrain from 
discussing any non-related students when possible. 
• Employees who use internal or external social media (blogs, 
X/Twitter, etc.) are expected to refrain from discussing 
confidential information and/or discussing specific students. 
Information that can be traced back to a specific student or 
could allow a student to be publicly identified should not be 
posted on any social media sites. 
• When using social media, employees are expected to refrain 
from posting any negative comments online about 
students. 
• Employees are required to notify their principal/headmaster 
before setting up an online site to facilitate student learning. 
Employees are encouraged to monitor/moderate online 
communication to the best of their abilities.  
• Employees are advised not to add any students/former 
students or parents as ‘friends’ or contacts on social media 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 6 of 13 
 
unless the site is specifically set up to support classroom 
instruction or school business. 
• Employees may communicate with BPS graduates (+18 
years old) on social media but should be advised to maintain 
professionalism and caution when communicating online. 
• Employees are advised not to add parents/guardians of 
students as ‘friends’ or contacts on social media to maintain 
professionalism and to avoid any appearance of conflict of 
interest. 
• Avoid responding to spam or phishing attempts that require 
a user to click on any links or to provide any account 
information. Note: BPS will never ask for a user’s account 
password for any purpose. Users are advised to report any 
suspicious requests for account information directly to the 
OIIT Help Desk (617-635-9200). 
SOLICITATION 
Web announcements and online communication promoting a 
business are prohibited by the BPS Solicitation Policy. The 
Superintendent’s Office may make exceptions if benefits are 
judged sufficient to merit exception. 
 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 7 of 13 
 
USE OF COPYRIGHTED MATERIALS 
Violations of copyright law that occur while using the BPS 
network or other resources are prohibited and have the potential 
to create liability for the district as well as for the individual. BPS 
staff and students must comply with regulations on copyright 
plagiarism that govern the use of material accessed through the 
BPS network.   
Users will refrain from using materials obtained online without 
requesting permission from the owner if the use of the material 
has the potential of being considered copyright infringement. 
BPS will cooperate with copyright protection agencies 
investigating copyright infringement by users of the computer 
systems and network of the Boston Public Schools. 
NETWORK USAGE 
Network access and bandwidth are provided to schools for 
academic and operational services. BPS reserves the right to 
prioritize network bandwidth and limit certain network activities 
that are negatively impacting academic and operational services. 
Users are prohibited from using the BPS network to access 
content that is inappropriate or illegal, including but not limited 
to content that is pornographic, obscene, illegal, or promotes 
violence. 
NETWORK FILTERING & MONITORING 
As required in the Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA), BPS 
is required to protect students from online threats, block access 
to inappropriate content, and monitor Internet use by minors on 
school networks. OIIT is responsible for managing the district’s 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 8 of 13 
 
Internet filter and will work with the BPS community to ensure 
the filter meets the academic and operational needs of each 
school while protecting minors from inappropriate content. 
By authorizing use of technology resources, BPS does not 
relinquish control over materials on the systems or contained in 
files on the systems.  There is no expectation of privacy related to 
information stored or transmitted over the BPS network or in 
BPS systems. BPS reserves the right to access, review, copy, store, 
or delete any files (unless other restrictions apply) stored on BPS 
computers and all employee and student communications using 
the BPS network. Electronic messages and files stored on BPS 
computers or transmitted using BPS systems may be treated like 
any other school property. District administrators and network 
personnel may review files and messages to maintain system 
integrity and, if necessary, to ensure that users are acting 
responsibly. BPS may choose to deploy location tracking software 
on devices for the sole purpose of locating devices identified as 
lost or stolen. 
PERSONAL USE 
BPS recognizes that users may use BPS email, devices, and 
network bandwidth for limited personal use; however, personal 
use should not interfere with or impede district business and/or 
cause additional financial burden on the district.  Excessive use or 
abuse of these privileges can be deemed in violation of the 
Acceptable Use Policy.  
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 9 of 13 
 
NETWORK SECURITY 
The BPS Wide Area Network (WAN) infrastructure, as well as the 
building-based Local Area Networks (LANs) are implemented 
with performance planning and appropriate security measures in 
mind. Modifications to an individual building network 
infrastructure and/or use will affect LAN performance and will 
reduce the efficiency of the WAN. For this reason, any additional 
network electronics including, but not limited to, switches, 
routers, and wireless access points must be approved, purchased, 
installed, and configured solely by OIIT to ensure the safety and 
efficiency of the network. Users are prohibited from altering or 
bypassing security measures on electronic devices, network 
equipment, and other software/online security measures without 
the written consent of the chief information officer. 
DATA & SYSTEMS 
Access to view, edit, or share personal data on students and 
employees maintained by BPS central offices, individual schools, 
or by persons acting for the district must abide by local, state, 
and federal regulations, including the Family Educational Rights 
and Privacy Act. Student and staff information and data may only 
be shared with individuals deemed eligible to have access by the 
person(s) responsible for oversight of that data. Outside parties 
and/or non-BPS individuals requesting protected data must 
receive approval from the Office of the Legal Advisor and have a 
non-disclosure agreement with the BPS. Individuals requesting 
ongoing access to data through BPS systems are required to 
have a designated BPS administrator who will act as a “sponsor” 
to ensure the safety of the data. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 10 of 13 
 
ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION OF DATA 
When educational records or private data are transmitted or 
shared electronically, staff are expected to protect the privacy of 
the data by password-protecting the record/file and only using 
BPS systems to transmit data. Staff are also expected to ensure 
records are sent only to individuals with a right to said records 
and must take reasonable measures to ensure that only the 
intended recipients are able to access the data. 
PASSWORDS 
Users are required to adhere to password requirements set forth 
by the Boston Public Schools and the City of Boston when 
logging into school computers, networks, and online systems. 
Users are not authorized to share their password and must use 
extra caution to avoid email scams that request passwords or 
other personal information. 
MEDIA & STORAGE 
All local media (USB devices, hard drives, CDs, flash drives, etc.) 
with sensitive data must be securely protected with a password 
and/or encrypted to ensure the safety of the data contained. Use 
of cloud-storage services for storage or transmission of files 
containing sensitive information must be approved by the Office 
of the Legal Advisor and OIIT. Users are encouraged to use BPS 
approved data/information systems for the storage and 
transmission of sensitive data whenever possible and avoid 
storage on local hardware that cannot be secured. 
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 11 of 13 
 
ELECTRONIC DEVICES 
BPS defines electronic devices as, but not limited to, the 
following: 
• Laptop and desktop computers, including like-devices 
• Tablets 
• Wireless email and text-messaging devices, i.e., iPod 
• Smartphones 
• Donated devices 
DEVICE SUPPORT 
BPS provides basic installation, synchronization, and software 
support for BPS-issued electronic devices. Devices must be 
connected to the BPS network on a regular basis to receive up-
to-date software and antivirus updates and for inventory 
purposes. Password protection is required on all BPS-issued 
electronic devices to prevent unauthorized use in the event of 
loss or theft. Users are responsible for making periodic backups 
of data files stored locally on their devices. 
LOSS/THEFT 
Users must take reasonable measures to prevent a device from 
being lost or stolen. In the event an electronic device is lost or 
stolen, the user is required to immediately notify appropriate 
school staff and/or their direct supervisor, local authorities, and 
the OIIT Service Desk (617-635-9200). The BPS will take all 
reasonable measures to recover the lost property and to ensure 
the security of any information contained on the device. 
RETURN OF ELECTRONIC DEVICES 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 12 of 13 
 
All technology purchased or donated to the BPS is considered 
district property, and all equipment assigned to employees or 
students must be returned prior to leaving their position or 
school. All equipment containing sensitive information and data 
must be returned directly to OIIT before it can be redeployed. 
PERSONAL ELECTRONIC DEVICES 
The use of personal electronic devices is permitted at the 
discretion of the principal/head of school and chief information 
officer. The BPS is not responsible for the maintenance and 
security of personal electronic devices and assumes no 
responsibility for loss or theft. The district reserves the right to 
enforce security measures on personal devices when used to 
access district tools and remove devices found to be in violation 
of the AUP. 
ENERGY MANAGEMENT 
BPS strives to reduce our environmental footprint by pursuing 
energy conservation efforts and practices. The district reserves 
the right to adjust power-saving settings on electronics to reduce 
the energy consumption. 
TECHNOLOGY PURCHASING & DONATIONS 
Technology hardware and software must be purchased or 
donated through OIIT unless prior approval has been received by 
OIIT and the Business Office. All technology purchases and 
donations must abide by City procurement policies and are 
subject to approval by OIIT. Technology pricing can include 
additional expenses required to ensure proper maintenance and 
security, including but not limited to warranties, 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular OIIT-01 
Page 13 of 13 
 
hardware/software upgrades, virus protection, and 
security/inventory software. Schools or departments applying for 
technology grants, funding, or donations must budget for any 
additional expenses associated with the requested technology 
and can be held responsible for any additional expenses incurred. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Director of Technology 
Department: 
Office of Instructional and Information 
Technology 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9199 
Fax: 
617-635-9176 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


