Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SAF-02 
Version 01 
 
WEAPONS AND OBJECTS OF NO REASONABLE USE 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
The Code of Conduct lists as grounds for suspension or expulsion 
the possession of any dangerous weapon, including but not 
limited to a firearm, knife, razor blade, club, explosive, taser, stun 
gun mace/pepper spray, tear gas, brass knuckles, studded 
bracelet, other dangerous weapons, or dangerous objects of no 
reasonable use to the student at school. (See Code of Conduct 
Sections 7.4 and 14.13).  
Heads of school and principals should note that as of January 
1999, the Boston City Council enacted an ordinance restricting 
the sale, possession, and use of laser pointer devices (Ord. 1999 c. 
2 § 4)). As a result of that ordinance, persons under twenty-one 
years of age are prohibited from possessing any laser pointer 
device on any school property within the City of Boston. Laser 
pens and other laser pointer devices are considered to be objects 
of no reasonable use within the meaning of the Code of Conduct. 
Students found in possession of such devices are subject to the 
provisions of Section 7.4 of the code. Students may also be 
subject to non-criminal court proceedings, under MGL, c.40, 
s.21D. 
Heads of school and principals must communicate to students 
that the possession of any weapon or object of no reasonable use 
in school, on the way to school, or during school-related activities 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-02 
Page 2 of 4 
 
is strictly forbidden, and that violations of this rule will be dealt 
with appropriately. Students must also be advised that under 
certain circumstances when evidence exists of serious 
misconduct outside of school — for example, a student’s being 
charged with or convicted of a felony, such that the student’s 
continued presence in school will have a substantial detrimental 
effect on the general welfare of the school — these shall be 
considered school related offenses and shall be dealt with in 
accordance with Section 7.0 of the Code of Conduct.  
Heads of school and principals must incorporate salient and 
pertinent information from the above two paragraphs into all 
school-based rules and student handbooks. Students and 
parents must be informed that such information serves as prior 
and ample notice of the School Department’s policy regarding 
weapons and other objects of no reasonable use. The phrase 
“prior and ample notice" is to be included in school-based rules 
and student handbooks. 
The Educational Reform Act of 1993 requires that all student 
handbooks include the following information. Such information is 
to be incorporated into all school-based rules as well. 
1. Any student found in possession of a dangerous weapon, 
including but not limited to a firearm or a knife; or found in 
possession of a controlled substance, including but not 
limited to marijuana, cocaine, or heroin, on school premises 
or at a school sponsored or school related event, including 
athletic games, may be subject to expulsion. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-02 
Page 3 of 4 
 
2. Any student who assaults a staff member on school 
grounds, or at a school sponsored, or school related event, 
including athletic games, may be subject to expulsion.  
Massachusetts law requires all school staff personnel to report in 
writing to their immediate supervisor any incident involving a 
student’s possession or use of a dangerous weapon on school 
premises, (MGL, c.71, s.31 L). Refer to MGL, c.269, s.10 and the Code 
of Conduct for definitions of dangerous weapons. 
If a dangerous weapon or an object of no reasonable use is 
confiscated, the following steps are to be taken: 
1. Each item is to be kept in the possession of the 
administrator, who will notify the Department of Safety 
Services immediately upon confiscation. If the item is a 
firearm, the Boston Police are to be immediately notified by 
telephone, using the 911 emergency line. School Department 
personnel will comply with subsequent instructions issued 
by the police. 
2. Safety Services will hold items, other than firearms, making 
them available for hearings, conferences, and court 
proceedings for a reasonable period. 
3. Following any parental conferences and court proceedings, 
items which are classified as dangerous weapons under 
MGL, c. 269, s.10 or MGL, c. 140, s.131 J shall be turned over to 
the Boston Police by the Department of Safety Services. 
4. In no instances will a dangerous weapon or an object of no 
reasonable use be returned to a student. The Department of 
Safety Services will be responsible for returning any 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-02 
Page 4 of 4 
 
property not classified as a dangerous weapon to the parent 
or legal guardian upon written request. 
5. Objects of no reasonable use not claimed by a parent or 
guardian within a reasonable period will be turned over to 
the Boston Police Department for destruction.  
All staff members are expected to meet the same standards that 
hold for students. Employees of the Boston Public School are 
prohibited from bringing firearms or other dangerous weapons 
onto school property at any time.  Except for law enforcement 
officials, it is a violation under federal and state law for anyone to 
bring a firearm, loaded or unloaded, into an elementary school, a 
secondary school, or a college or university, even if that person is 
otherwise licensed to carry a firearm. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Deputy Chief of Safety 
Department: 
Safety Services 
Mailing Address: 
213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, MA  02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000 
Fax: 
617-635-8006 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


