Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SAF-01 
Version 01 
 
STUDENT SEARCH PROCEDURES 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
 
School leaders, principals, and other administrative personnel are 
responsible for enforcing the Student Code of Conduct and for 
establishing a safe and secure environment for learning in the 
schools under their supervision. The United States Supreme 
Court in the case of New Jersey v. T.L.O., 469 U. S. 325 (1985) has 
issued a decision that affects how school personnel may enforce 
school rules and maintain an atmosphere conducive to teaching 
and learning. 
The Supreme Court’s decision established constitutional 
standards for student searches by school officials and school 
employees. Specifically, the Court ruled that the Fourth 
Amendment to the United States Constitution, which prohibits 
unreasonable searches and seizures by government employees, 
is not violated when public school administrators and teachers 
conduct student searches if there are reasonable grounds to 
believe that the search will yield evidence of either a violation of 
law, a violation of school rules, or both. 
In announcing its ruling, the Court rejected the school board’s 
argument that school officials, like parents, are exempt from the 
requirements of the Fourth Amendment. At the same time, the 
Court rejected the student’s claim that school officials must 
obtain warrants or meet the more rigorous “probable cause” 
standard, applicable to searches by law enforcement officials, 
before conducting student searches on school property. Rather, 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-01 
Page 2 of 6 
 
the Court struck a balance between the student’s legitimate 
expectations of privacy in the school setting and the school’s 
equally legitimate need to maintain an environment in which 
learning can take place. The Court held that the “legality of a 
search of a student should depend simply on the reasonableness, 
under all the circumstances, of the search.”   
To be legal, a student search must be reasonable in two respects. 
First there must be reasonable suspicion to believe that the 
student has in their possession evidence tending to show either a 
violation of law or a violation of school rules. To reasonably 
suspect something, school officials must have facts of sufficient 
quantity and certainty to establish that the suspicion is likely to 
be true. Mere suspicion, hearsay, or a single isolated fact, 
unsupported by further evidence, is generally not enough to 
meet the reasonable suspicion standard. Second, the scope of 
the search must be reasonable in relation to the intrusion on the 
student’s privacy. There must be a likelihood that the area 
searched will yield the item(s) being sought. 
The determination of whether a search is reasonable is a 
question of judgment without definite benchmarks. School 
officials must exercise common sense and good judgment to 
ensure that student searches conform to the “reasonableness” 
standard.  
In conducting student searches, school personnel should adhere 
to the following guidelines: 
1. Only administrators who are authorized under Boston 
Public Schools’ Code of Conduct to suspend students from 
school should conduct student searches. The authority to 
conduct student searches should be limited to school 
leaders, principals, other administrative officials, and 
personnel specifically designated by school leaders, heads of 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-01 
Page 3 of 6 
 
schools, principals, and other administrative personnel to 
suspend students. 
2. If the school administrator believes that a student may have 
in their possession a firearm, weapon, dangerous object, or 
drugs, or otherwise fears that a search would jeopardize 
their safety, the administrator should not search the student 
until the student has notified the Safety Services 
Department to be present during the search. 
It should be noted that the Supreme Court specifically did 
not decide in the T.L.O. case what standard should apply to 
student searches conducted by school officials in 
conjunction with or at the behest of a law enforcement 
agency. However, the Court noted that the higher standard 
of “probable cause” has been applied to student searches 
involving law enforcement agencies by a lower federal 
court. Thus, it may be expected that Massachusetts courts 
will closely scrutinize student searches conducted by school 
officials in conjunction with police officers. Consequently, 
such searches may be deemed reasonable only if based 
upon the more stringent probable cause standard. However, 
the presence of a police officer or safety specialist for the 
purpose of ensuring the safety of the administrator should 
not alone trigger the higher standard. 
3. Authorized personnel should search only students of the 
same sex. All searches must be conducted in the presence 
of another staff member of the same sex, who shall serve as 
a witness. A male administrator may not search a female 
student. If a female administrator is not available to search a 
female student, the administrator may designate another 
female staff member to conduct the search. If a male 
administrator is not available to search a male student, the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-01 
Page 4 of 6 
 
administrator may designate another male staff member to 
conduct the search. It is important to emphasize that 
searches must always be done by a staff member of the 
same sex, and must always be done in the presence of a 
witness of the same sex. 
4. Before conducting a student search, the administrator must 
be confident that the reasonableness standard, as outlined 
by the T.L.O. decision (The United States Supreme Court in 
the case of New Jersey v. T.L.O., 469 U. S. 325) has been 
satisfied. 
5. The manner and method of the search should be tailored to 
the circumstances. The scope of the search normally should 
be limited to those areas and objects that could reasonably 
be expected to contain the item(s) being sought. The basis 
for the suspicion that a student possesses evidence of a 
violation of the law or school rule should increase in direct 
proportion to the extent of the intrusion upon the student’s 
privacy in conducting the search. A body search of a student 
requires a higher level of suspicion than a search of a 
student’s book bag.   
 
In determining whether and how to conduct a student 
search, school officials must consider such factors as the 
danger posed by the object being sought; the likelihood of 
the evidence being disposed of or destroyed; and the age, 
sex, and prior disciplinary record of the student. The more 
serious the threat posed by the item(s) being sought, the 
more likely a court will be to find the search reasonable. On 
the other hand, it is likely that a court would strike down a 
search that involved the wholesale rummaging through a 
student’s personal property without individualized suspicion 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-01 
Page 5 of 6 
 
that the student had violated either the law or school rules. 
Student searches must not become general and 
exploratory. 
6. School Department employees are not allowed to conduct 
strip searches. Strip searches are searches in which a 
student is asked to remove articles of clothing that could 
result in the exposure of undergarments. 
7. An administrator should never use physical force in 
attempting to conduct a search. If a student refuses to 
submit to a search, the Department of Safety Services (617-
635-8000) should be called for assistance. 
8. Searches of student lockers and desks, which remain the 
property of the Boston Public Schools while used by 
students, should be based upon reasonable grounds to 
suspect that they will yield evidence of either violation of 
law or school rules. Refer to Superintendent’s Circular SAF-
03 Locker Policy for related information. 
 
9. If a search by a school administrator yields evidence that a 
law has been violated, the administrator should notify the 
Department of Safety Services. 
School leaders/principals must incorporate salient and pertinent 
information from this memorandum into all school-based rules 
and student handbooks. Students and parents must be informed 
that such information serves as prior and ample notice of the 
School Department’s procedure for student searches. The phrase 
“prior and ample notice” is to be included in school-based rules 
and student handbooks. 
 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SAF-01 
Page 6 of 6 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Legal Advisor  
Department: 
Office of Legal Advisor 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9320 
Fax: 
617-635-9327 
Email: 
legal@bostonpublicschools.org 
OR 
Owner: 
Deputy Chief of Safety Services 
Department: 
Safety Services 
Mailing Address: 
213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, MA  02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000 
Fax: 
617-635-8006 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


