Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SHS-25 
Version 01 
 
 
 
SICKLE CELL DISEASE POLICY AND IMPLEMENTATION  
 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
POLICY BACKGROUND  
BPS recognizes that a clear, comprehensive policy on Sickle Cell 
Disease (SCD) management in school can have an impact on 
academic achievement and support the general wellbeing of 
students with SCD.  
 
POLICY STATEMENT  
BPS acknowledges that SCD is a disability that substantially 
limits a major life activity, and qualifies students with SCD for a 
comprehensive evaluation and consideration of eligibility under 
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Section 504) to 
determine the services and accommodations they may need to 
attain a free appropriate public education. As part of BPS’s 
commitment to maintaining an educational environment that is 
welcoming, inclusive, and encouraging, such that all students are 
able to flourish, all schools must follow established protocols and 
procedures for addressing the needs of children with SCD and 
regularly evaluate the implementation of these plans.  
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 2 of 12 
 
 
 
 
BPS acknowledges that the successful implementation of this 
policy at the district and school levels relies on fostering and 
maintaining a culture of awareness and acceptance regarding 
SCD through acknowledging the history of SCD and the unique 
challenges students with SCD face. With this in mind, BPS 
recognizes that:  
● People with SCD have long faced harmful stigmas, many 
with racially charged origins.  
● People with SCD are often challenged about the seriousness 
of their disease or even its existence.  
● Students with SCD have long experienced barriers to their 
health and success at school.  
 
IMPLEMENTATION IN BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS  
Sickle Cell Disease Basics  
SCD refers to a group of genetic blood disorders. It affects 
individuals of all races and ethnicities, but in the United States it 
is especially prevalent among African Americans and Hispanics. 
Complications include but are not limited to severe anemia, 
susceptibility to infections, insomnia, jaundice, frequent 
urination, dehydration, chronic pain, and episodes of extreme, 
debilitating pain. Pain episodes (also known as “crises”) can cause 
tissue and organ damage, lead to hospitalizations, and have life-
threatening consequences. People with SCD are also at 
heightened risk for anxiety, depression, post-traumatic stress 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 3 of 12 
 
 
 
 
disorder, social isolation, delayed social development, visible 
strokes, and “silent strokes” that may go unnoticed but can affect 
learning abilities in the short and long terms. Pain episodes and 
other complications may be triggered by a wide variety of 
physical and psychological stressors.  
As a result of these complications and the side effects of 
medications, many children with SCD experience frequent 
absences and difficulty focusing or engaging as they usually do 
at school, particularly with regard to physical activities. On days 
free from harsher symptoms and side effects, many students 
with SCD still experience baseline symptoms and health 
vulnerabilities that require modifications to standard 
participation requirements.  
Additionally, the biology and history of SCD create the following 
unique challenges:  
● SCD pain is often “invisible.” People with SCD learn coping 
mechanisms (such as staying still and quiet) that may seem 
counterintuitive. SCD pain therefore often goes undetected 
by others, leading to challenges about the seriousness or 
existence of the pain.  
● Symptoms such as jaundice, short stature, and delayed 
social development, along with repeated absences, can 
make students with SCD targets of bullying and 
harassment.  
● Medications used to treat people with SCD, such as opioid 
pain medications and hydroxyurea (a chemotherapy drug 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 4 of 12 
 
 
 
 
that can also help some people with SCD), can cause serious 
and disruptive side effects and carry stigmas of their own.  
● Individuals with SCD have historically been stigmatized in 
the community, hospitals, schools, the armed services, and 
places of employment. Labeled a “Black disease,” SCD has 
historically been associated with claims of racial weakness 
and genetic inferiority.  
 
OVERVIEW – ADDRESSING NEEDS OF BPS STUDENTS WITH SCD  
A.  
CHILD FIND: Identification, Location, Immediate 
Accommodations & Evaluation  
 
1.  Identification and Location  
BPS acknowledges that, due to the stigmas noted above, many 
parents choose not to identify their child with SCD instead of 
seeking supportive services and accommodations for their 
children. To overcome this challenge, BPS utilizes multiple 
strategies as part of an outreach and public awareness campaign 
to raise awareness of SCD and its effects on learning to assure 
families that BPS is a willing partner to create a community of 
support, collaboration, and understanding around students with 
SCD. These strategies include but are not limited to: 
● Collaboration with local medical centers that treat 
children with SCD and leveraging these to develop 
strategies for identification and location (e.g., sharing 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 5 of 12 
 
 
 
 
outreach materials with clinics, providing “know your 
rights” materials for families in clinics that see students 
with SCD, meeting with medical providers to develop 
additional strategies etc.) 
● Ensuring that all communications are available in 
multiple languages and/or modes in order to be 
accessible to all families  
● Ensuring that the outreach and public awareness 
campaign includes outreach to preschools, early 
intervention providers and community support 
providers, who are likely to have students that are or 
will enroll in BPS (i.e. located in Greater Boston)  
● Additional strategies developed with input from the 
SCD Advisory Group  
 
Specific considerations regarding enrollment:  
Upon identifying a child with SCD at enrollment, BPS ensures 
proper placement in a school with appropriate health and related 
services. Given stigmas related to SCD, BPS gives special 
attention to ensuring the privacy of students with SCD. This 
includes appropriately limiting the scope of releases parents sign 
regarding disclosures of their child’s SCD status. Further, BPS 
ensures appropriate efforts are made to initiate and maintain 
connections between school health staff and students with SCD, 
their parents, and their medical teams upon enrollment of the 
student (or upon identification if after enrollment). This includes 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 6 of 12 
 
 
 
 
providing information to parents and school health staff and 
ensuring privacy rights are maintained.  
 
2.  Interim Services/Supports Pursuant to Section 504  
BPS acknowledges that, because SCD is a physical disability that 
substantially limits major life activities, students with SCD are 
entitled to certain accommodations upon identification and 
location to ensure their health, safety, and equal educational 
opportunities, pending the completion of a comprehensive 
evaluation. All rights and protections pursuant to Section 504, 
including procedural safeguards, are ensured upon identifying 
and locating students with SCD. BPS ensures that the interim 
accommodations implemented pursuant to Section 504 include 
the following:  
● Two sets of textbooks, one for school and the other for 
home  
● Unlimited bathroom access as needed  
● Unlimited access as needed to the school nurse or 
school health official  
● Unlimited access as needed to communicate with 
parent and/or physician if they are experiencing 
symptoms that are unfamiliar or are ones their 
physicians told them to contact them about if 
experienced 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 7 of 12 
 
 
 
 
● Unlimited water access as needed through access to a 
water bottle and water fountains  
● Time/permission to access medication (including 
prescribed opioids), as needed  
● Permission to wear a coat indoors whenever feeling 
cold and to stay indoors or be exempt from outdoor 
activities whenever it is too hot, too cold, or when air 
quality is poor  
● Permission to move away from indoor AC or heating 
units  
● Consideration for door-to-door transportation, except 
in the very limited circumstances where it would be 
impractical (e.g., student resides next door or across 
the street from the school building they attends) 
● Permission to access an elevator, if relevant, and to 
leave class early to get to the next one (or alternatively, 
extra time between classes)  
● Modified participation in gym class, based on student 
needs  
● Proactive plans to address academic and 
social/emotional supports upon return to school from 
absences including supplemental instruction provided 
by qualified subject-area teachers and service 
providers in order to scaffold missed and ongoing 
instruction in the classroom and to enable students to 
catch up with and stay on pace with classmates  


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 8 of 12 
 
 
 
 
3.  Comprehensive Evaluation  
BPS ensures that all students with SCD receive a timely, 
comprehensive evaluation of all areas of suspected disability to 
determine the nature and extent of a student’s need, if any, for 
specialized instruction or related aids and services. BPS ensures 
that a neuropsychological evaluation is considered as part of a 
comprehensive evaluation for any student with SCD.  
 
B.  
FREE APPROPRIATE PUBLIC EDUCATION 
To address needs for students with SCD, BPS ensures that—as 
part of special education and related services that may be 
identified through comprehensive evaluations—any 504 plans 
and/or IEPs specifically address challenges students with SCD 
face related to health and safety needs, academic needs, social-
emotional needs, resuming school after absences, and 
stagnations and/or declines in academic progress or 
performance. BPS therefore ensures the utilization of a checklist 
of potential accommodations at each Section 504/IEP Team 
meeting for a student with SCD. The checklist is considered in 
addition to all other appropriate services and supports 
determined necessary for an individual student with SCD to 
receive a free appropriate public education. BPS ensures that 
documentation of each item’s consideration by the 504 or IEP 
team is included in meeting minutes and provided to parents.  
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 9 of 12 
 
 
 
 
BPS ensures that neither Individual Health Plans (IHPs) nor 
Individual Collaborative Health Plans (ICHPs) are used in lieu of a 
504 Plan, IEP or interim accommodation plan.  
Additional points requiring particular attention:  
1.  Continually Updating Health and Safety Services/Supports  
BPS ensures that the 504 Plans and/or IEPs of children with SCD 
reflect the up-to-date health and safety needs of the child, 
recognizing that these needs may change during the course of 
the year. BPS ensures that any new information received 
regarding changed needs for a student with SCD will be 
addressed in light of the student’s 504 Plan or IEP.  
 
2.  Tracking Effects of Absences and Sudden Changes in 
Needs  
BPS ensures that, when a child with SCD has had absences and 
there has been a lack of expected progress toward annual goals 
in an IEP and/or in the general curriculum, discussions are 
promptly held regarding how the absences are interfering with 
academic progress and how this interference can be overcome, 
including consideration of instruction in the summer. BPS also 
ensures that sudden drops in academic performance and sudden 
increases in social-emotional needs that are experienced by 
students with SCD are detected and responded to appropriately.  
 
3.  Designation Director of Constituent Services If and When 
Services or Supports Are Not Provided  


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 10 of 12 
 
 
 
 
BPS ensures that students with SCD, their parents, and (with 
proper consent/privacy precautions) their medical team have 
access to the Boston Public Schools Director of Constituent 
Services to escalate concerns they have about a child with SCD 
not receiving a free appropriate public education. This process is 
separate from and does not preclude due process and grievance 
rights available under Section 504 and IDEA. These mechanisms 
are necessary given the severity and swiftness of the health, 
academic, and social-emotional consequences that can occur for 
children with SCD.  
 
C.  
ENSURING APPROPRIATE CULTURE WITHIN BPS 
REGARDING SCD 
BPS ensures that the culture regarding SCD with BPS includes:  
● believing students with SCD when they communicate that 
they: are in pain, are having some other complication, or are 
unable to perform a certain task due to their symptoms  
● not blaming or shaming students with SCD or their parents 
for their challenges  
● identifying challenges quickly and working collaboratively 
to find appropriate solutions  
● facilitating awareness that children with SCD are members 
of school communities  
● facilitating an understanding of what SCD is and its 
implications for health and safety  


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 11 of 12 
 
 
 
 
● facilitating an understanding of the services/supports that 
students with SCD may need to ensure their health and 
safety, as well as an understanding of the importance of 
adhering to these accommodations  
● facilitating an understanding of the special education and 
related services a student with SCD may need to ensure 
their access to a free appropriate public education  
 
1. Awareness and Trainings  
As part of ensuring an appropriate culture regarding SCD, BPS 
conducts ongoing outreach and public awareness campaigns 
that address each aspect of an appropriate culture described 
above. BPS also conducts ongoing training for all teachers, 
administrators, nurses, and other relevant staff. Training covers all 
necessary topics to ensure that all BPS staff coming into contact 
with students with SCD have the necessary knowledge and 
awareness to properly implement all policies, protocols, and 
procedures regarding SCD and to appropriately support the 
student with SCD. School nurses receive additional periodic 
training in managing the medical needs of students with SCD. 
 
2. Scope and Frequency of Awareness and Training Activities  
BPS ensures that awareness and training efforts are wide enough 
in scope to reach all appropriate personnel and repeat with 
enough frequency to reach any new or temporary personnel who 
may enter over the course of a school year.  


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-25 
Page 12 of 12 
 
 
 
 
D.  
DATA MONITORING  
BPS conducts sufficient data monitoring to track successes and 
failures in the implementation of its policies, protocols, and 
procedures regarding SCD. This monitoring includes 
documenting instances where students with SCD, their parents, 
and/or their medical team had to escalate concerns about health 
and safety services/supports being provided or followed and/or a 
free appropriate public education being properly provided. The 
data produced is regularly reported through summary statistics 
without personally identifiable information to the SCD Advisory 
Group and publicly via BPS website postings and press releases.  
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact:  
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent   


