Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
SHS-05 
Version 01 
 
 
 
TUBERCULOSIS PROGRAM 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
POLICY ON TUBERCULOSIS TESTING 
All students must have an assessment of tuberculosis risk. Staff 
are no longer required to show evidence of TB skin test screening 
at time of employment. 
PROTOCOL FOR TUBERCULOSIS PROGRAM 
Students: 
● At the time of registration for entry into the Boston Public 
Schools, if parents present with information on TB 
screening, the data will be entered along with the 
immunization data into the student(s) electronic health 
record. 
● No child will have school registration delayed because of 
lack of tuberculosis screening documentation. 
● It is the responsibility of the primary care health provider, 
and NOT the school system, to ensure that appropriate 
screening for tuberculosis is occurring in the community. 
● The school nurse may choose to check a child’s PPD 
(Mantoux) or monitor preventive therapy at the request of 
the primary care provider. The primary care provider must 
submit a written physician order to the school nurse for 
services.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-05 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
● Written documentation of an in-school PPD test result or 
the monitoring of preventive therapy will be provided to the 
primary care provider by the school nurse. 
● Students with active disease will be excluded from school 
until placed on treatment and written documentation by 
BPHC TB Control of non-contiguous state is presented. 
Staff: 
● Staff are no longer required to have TB screening as 
candidates for hiring. The regulation of Communicable 
Tuberculosis Periodic Examination of School Personnel has 
been repealed in the Massachusetts General Laws.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


