Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SHS-21 
Version 01 
 
 
 
DIABETES POLICY  
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
BACKGROUND 
Diabetes is a chronic disease in which the body does not make or 
properly use insulin. Insulin is a hormone produced by the 
pancreas that is needed to convert sugar and starches into 
energy for the body.  People with diabetes have increased blood 
glucose (sugar) levels because they lack or have insufficient 
insulin or are resistant to insulin’s effects. High levels of glucose 
build up in the blood and spill into the urine; as a result the body 
loses its main source of fuel. 
There are many types of diabetes that affect children. The most 
common types seen in school settings include: 
• Type 1 (formerly called “Insulin-Dependent” or “Juvenile-
Onset”) Diabetes Mellitus: This type of diabetes is considered 
a disease of the immune system because the immune 
system destroys the cells in the pancreas that produce the 
hormone insulin.  People with type 1 diabetes must inject 
insulin every day because their bodies cannot produce 
insulin. It needs to be injected under the skin to be 
absorbed; it cannot be taken by mouth because it would not 
be effective. 
• Type 2 (formerly called “Non-Insulin Dependent” or “Adult-


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 2 of 13 
 
 
 
Onset”) Diabetes Mellitus: People with type 2 diabetes 
produce insulin, but the cells of the body do not respond 
normally to the insulin. This is referred to as insulin 
resistance. Type 2 diabetes can often be managed with diet 
and exercise, but some students also need medications 
taken by mouth (oral hypoglycemic agents), insulin 
injections, or both to help glucose enter their cells. 
• Pre-Diabetes: Pre-diabetes is a condition in which blood 
glucose levels are higher than normal, but not yet high 
enough to be classiﬁed as diabetes.  Before people develop 
type 2 diabetes, they almost always have pre-diabetes. 
• Gestational Diabetes (may affect teens who are pregnant): 
Gestational diabetes results from pregnancy hormones that 
cause the body to become resistant to its own insulin. 
Diabetes is the third most common chronic health disease 
affecting an estimated 2.22/1,000 children and adolescents 
according to The Search for Diabetes in Youth (SEARCH) Study 
(Pettitt et al., 2014). Children and adolescents are defined as 
youth under the age of 20 years. In 2009, approximately 191,986 or 
one in 433 youth with diabetes lived in the U.S. From these, 87% 
have type 1 diabetes and 11% have type 2 diabetes (Pettitt et al., 
2014). In the years 2008 to 2009, 18,436 youth were newly 
diagnosed with type 1 diabetes and 5,089 youth were newly 
diagnosed with type 2 diabetes (Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention [CDC], 2014). As the sixth leading cause of death by 
disease in the United States, long-term complications of diabetes 
include heart disease, stroke, blindness, kidney failure, nerve 
disease, gum disease, and amputation of the foot or leg. 
Although there is no cure, diabetes can be managed, and 
complications can be delayed or prevented. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 3 of 13 
 
 
 
Advances in diabetes technology continue to enhance students' 
ability to manage diabetes at school, thus improving their quality 
of life. Children and adolescents monitor blood glucose levels 
several times a day via blood glucose meters and continuous 
glucose monitors, conduct carbohydrate calculations, and inject 
insulin via syringe, pen, and pump to attain blood glucose control 
(Brown, 2016). Intensive resources and consistent evidenced-
based interventions will achieve the long-term health benefits of 
optimal diabetes control, according to the landmark study from 
the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group 
(DCCT, 1993).  
Coordination and collaboration among members of the school 
health team and the student’s personal diabetes health care 
team are essential for helping students manage their diabetes in 
the school setting. Members of the school health team include 
the student with diabetes, parents/guardians, school nurse, 
teacher(s), school leader, COSES, social worker, coach, physical 
education teacher, food service staff, and other school staff 
members. In addition, it is essential for team members to 
understand the federal and state laws that may apply to students 
with diabetes, including Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 
1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and the Individuals with 
Disabilities Education Act. 
The purpose of these Administrative Procedures and Guidelines 
is to: 
• Provide a safe and healthy learning environment for all 
students 
• Protect the rights of students with diabetes to participate in 
all school activities 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 4 of 13 
 
 
 
• Ensure proper medical management and safety of the 
student, minimizing the possibility that diabetes related 
emergencies might disrupt their educational and classroom 
activities 
• Facilitate self-management so that the student may 
gradually assume responsibility for their care 
• Reduce the likelihood of severe or potentially life-
threatening diabetic emergencies during school 
• Ensure a rapid and effective response in the case of a severe 
or potentially life threatening diabetic emergency 
EDUCATION AND TRAINING 
Staff to be trained includes, but are not limited to, teachers, 
paraprofessionals, food service staff, school leaders, support staff, 
and student interns/teachers. Coordination and collaboration 
among members of the school health team and the student’s 
personal diabetes health care team are essential for helping 
students manage their diabetes in the school setting.  
Education and training for key personnel by the school nurse will 
include: 
• an overview of diabetes 
• signs and symptoms of diabetes, including 
hyper/hypoglycemia  
• role and responsibilities in prevention and reducing risks 
• recognizing and responding to a diabetic emergency 
• review of the student’s Individual Health Plan (IHP) and 
Diabetes Emergency Action plan 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 5 of 13 
 
 
 
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
Role of the Parent/Guardian 
• At the time of registration, inform the Welcome Center staff 
of any health concerns of their child, including Type 1 
Diabetes.  The Health Services Department remains 
available to support any student or parent/guardian wishing 
to discuss this information privately.  
• Provide the school nurse with a current diabetes medical 
management plan and emergency management plan from 
the student’s endocrinologist. It is recommended that the 
parent/guardian meet with the school nurse in person to 
discuss their child’s plan. 
• Actively participate with the school nurse in creating an 
individualized healthcare plan for school that supports the 
student’s medical, educational, and developmental needs 
• Provide the school nurse with the necessary supplies 
needed to care for the student during the school day: 
insulin, glucometer, glucagon, syringes, etc. In the case of an 
insulin pump: extra insulin delivery catheter, insulin, insulin 
receptacle. 
• Provide the school nurse with the carbohydrate count for 
each item when lunch or snack is brought from home. 
• Provide current contact information including cell phone 
numbers (if available), emergency numbers, and at least two 
back up numbers to call if parents/guardians are not 
reachable. 
• Educate after-school activities personnel about the diabetic 
management plan and provide a plan as necessary. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 6 of 13 
 
 
 
Role of the School Administrator 
• Facilitate diabetes management training for school 
personnel. 
• Support faculty, staff, and parents in implementing all 
aspects of the Diabetes Management Plan. 
• Identify all staff members who have responsibility for the 
student with diabetes throughout the school day and 
during school-sponsored extracurricular activities and field 
trips. 
• Ensure there is a contingency plan in the case of a 
substitute nurse, teacher, or food service personnel. 
• Ensure that the classroom staff have been trained in an 
overview of diabetes, how to recognize and respond to 
hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia and the steps to take in 
the event of an emergency. 
• Make certain that emergency communication devices (e.g., 
walkie-talkie, intercom, cell phone, etc.) are always present 
and functional. 
• Promote a supportive learning environment for students 
with diabetes to manage their diabetes safely and 
effectively at school. 
• Inform the school nurse 4-6 weeks in advance of field trips 
to thoroughly support a student's participation in a field trip 
and ensure adequate planning time (e.g. necessity for 
nursing support during the field trip). 
• Understand the federal and state laws that may apply to 
students with diabetes, including Section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 7 of 13 
 
 
 
Act, and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. 
Role of the School Nurse: 
• Obtain and review the student’s current Diabetes Medical 
Management Plan (DMMP) along with other pertinent 
information from the student’s parents/guardians and 
health care providers. 
• Obtain releases for nurse/health care provider 
communication and physician authorization for medication. 
• Develop an Individualized Health Care Plan (IHP). Promote 
and encourage independence and self-care consistent with 
the student’s ability, skill, maturity, and development as 
indicated in the DMMP. After reviewing the IHP with the 
parents/guardians and student, implement, review, and 
update the plan throughout the school year as needed. 
• Develop a plan for student management in the classroom, 
lunchroom, playground, athletics, and field trips that 
provides for routine and emergency care. These would 
include blood glucose monitoring; urine/blood ketone 
testing; insulin administration; glucagon administration; and 
assistance with carbohydrate counting. 
• Perform or assist the student with routine and emergency 
diabetes care tasks, including blood glucose monitoring, 
urine or blood ketone testing, insulin and other medication 
administration, carbohydrate counting, and glucagon 
administration. 
•  Maintain accurate documentation in the electronic health 
record of all diabetes care provided at school. Document 
communications with the student, the parents/guardians, 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 8 of 13 
 
 
 
and the student’s personal diabetes health care team, and 
document communications related to the training and 
supervision of trained diabetes personnel. 
• Ensure that all other staff members who have contact with 
students with diabetes are familiar with their Individual 
Health Care Plans (IHPs) on a need-to-know basis. 
• Provide a list of students with diabetes (if consent given by 
parent) to all staff on a need-to-know basis, including bus 
drivers. 
• Conduct in-service training and education for appropriate 
staff regarding a student’s symptoms; risk reduction 
procedures; emergency procedures; and appropriate 
responses to symptoms of diabetic emergencies. This 
includes PE instructors and coaches. This training should be 
repeated annually or when a student transfers classrooms or 
schools.  
• Ensure that there is a contingency plan in place for all 
school-related venues where substitutes are utilized. 
• Encourage the students to eat all meals and snacks fully and 
on time. Be flexible with time requirements for eating and 
provide the parent or guardian with the carbohydrate 
menu. 
• Make certain that emergency communication devices (e.g., 
walkie-talkie, intercom, cell phone, etc.) are always present 
and functional. 
• Participate in the teams that develop and implement the 
student’s Section 504 Plan, other education plan, or 
individualized education program. Contribute to IEP, and 
504 implementation of diabetes related issues, where 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 9 of 13 
 
 
 
appropriate. 
• Communicate with the student’s parents/guardians and—
with their permission—communicate with the student’s 
personal diabetes health care team about progress as well 
as any concerns about the student’s diabetes management 
or health status, such as hypoglycemia episodes, 
hyperglycemia, general attitude, emotional issues, and self-
management. 
Role of the Coordinator of Special Education (COSE): 
• If a student is referred for consideration for a 504 
accommodation plan and/or special education, the COSE 
will process as appropriate. The parent/guardian, school 
nurse and other school staff must be involved in the plan 
development and implementation. 
• If a student is eligible for a 504 accommodation plan (or is 
being evaluated for a 504 accommodation plan), the team 
will discuss eligibility for transportation. 
• If a student already has an IEP (or is being evaluated) and 
transportation may be necessary for the medical condition 
(but not necessarily the area of educational disability), the 
team will consider transportation needs (team will include 
school nurse). If special transportation is found to be 
necessary, it can be added to the IEP. 
 
Role of the Teacher 
• Have a list of all students in the classroom with chronic 
diseases, including diabetes. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 10 of 13 
 
 
 
• Participate in team meetings for students with diabetes and 
participate in in-service training provided by the school 
nurse. 
• Be prepared to respond immediately to the signs and 
symptoms of hypoglycemia (low blood glucose) and 
hyperglycemia (high blood glucose), in accordance with the 
student’s Emergency Care Plans for Hypoglycemia and 
Hyperglycemia. 
• Keep accessible the student’s emergency plan with a photo 
(where possible) in the classroom (with parent's permission) 
or keep with the lesson plan. 
• Inform volunteers, student teachers, aides, specialists, and 
substitute teachers about the student’s condition both 
through verbal communication and in an organized, 
prominent, and accessible written format. 
• Recognize that eating meals and snacks on time is a critical 
component of diabetes management. 
• Coordinate with parent/guardian to provide lesson plans to 
accommodate any learning needs. 
• Support the student in participating in all school-sponsored 
activities. 
• Inform the school nurse 4-6 weeks in advance of field trips 
to ensure adequate planning time for supports. 
• Notify the school nurse and parents/guardians in advance of 
changes in the school schedule, such as class parties, field 
trips, and other special events. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 11 of 13 
 
 
 
Role of Physical Education Teacher and Coaches 
• Have a list of all students in their charge who have diabetes. 
• Coaches will be told of any students on their teams who 
have diabetes through review in ASPEN/Sports Clearance, 
and will be trained in identification of symptoms of diabetes 
emergencies. 
• Participate in in-service training about diabetes as needed.  
• Keep accessible the student's emergency plan with a photo 
(where possible) in the specific venue (with parent's 
permission). 
• Allow students with diabetes to wear their insulin pump 
and/or sensor and medical ID during physical activity. 
• Designate a safe place for students to keep their diabetes 
supplies, including their insulin pump, if they remove it 
during physical activity. 
• Make sure blood glucose monitoring equipment and a 
quick-acting form of glucose are available at all activity sites. 
• Include the student’s Emergency Care Plans for 
Hypoglycemia and Hyperglycemia and diabetes supplies in 
the first aid pack that goes out to physical education 
activities, practices, and games. 
• Allow the student to monitor blood glucose levels and/or 
administer insulin, as outlined in the student’s health care 
plans and education plans. 
•  Recognize that a change in the student’s behavior could be 
a symptom of blood glucose changes. 
• Understand and be aware that hypoglycemia (low blood 
glucose) can occur during and after physical activity. 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 12 of 13 
 
 
 
• Inform substitutes about the student’s diagnosis and the 
signs and symptoms of hyper or hypoglycemia. 
Role of Food Services 
• Work with health services to provide access to carbohydrate 
menus to parents and school nurses and assist in 
carbohydrate counting activities. 
• Make available and maintain current food labels for all meal 
plans. Provide nutrition information on all menu items and a 
la carte items to the school staff and parents/guardians. 
Role of the Office of Transportation  
• Provide training for all bus monitors for medical 
emergencies, including but not limited to Heartsaver 
CPR/AED, Heartsaver First Aid. 
• Know local EMS (Emergency Medical Services) procedures. 
• Have functioning communication equipment to access EMS 
• Understand that a student with diabetes may need to have 
a snack to regulate their blood sugar, despite the policy of 
no food eating allowed on the bus. 
• Encourage 1:1 communication between bus monitors and 
school-based staff as well as between bus monitors and 
parents/guardians. 
Role of the School Bus Company 
• Provide training for all bus drivers for medical emergencies, 
including but not limited to Heartsaver CPR/AED and 
Heartsaver First Aid. 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-21 
Page 13 of 13 
 
 
 
• Know local EMS (Emergency Medical Services) procedures. 
• Have functioning communication equipment to access EMS. 
• Understand that a student with diabetes may need to have 
a snack to regulate their blood sugar, despite the policy of 
no food eating allowed on the bus. 
REFERENCES 
• Massachusetts | ADA 
• Diabetes Management in the School Setting 
• Diabetes | Healthy Schools | CDC 
• Diabetes Care Tasks at School | ADA 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


