Page 1:
 
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SHS-08 
Version 01 
 
MEDICATION ADMINISTRATION 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
POLICY FOR ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATIONS 
The school nurse is the supervisor of the medication 
administration program in the school.  The school nurse is the 
only staff authorized to administer medication except in two 
situations: (1) during field trips and (2) in the event of a life-
threatening allergic reaction requiring administration of 
Epinephrine via an autoinjector. The school nurse is responsible 
for training designated staff in the administration of medication 
in these two situations. This policy is in accordance with 
Massachusetts state regulations for administration of medication 
in public schools (105 CMR 210.000). The protocol has been 
approved by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health. For 
more detailed information, please refer to the 105 CMR 210: 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH   
PROTOCOL FOR ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATION 
This section is a summary of the medication protocol. The full 
protocol is in the Nurses’ Protocol and Procedure Manual and 
contains the referenced forms. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 2 of 14 
 
General: 
● The school nurse shall be the supervisor of the medication 
administration program in the school. 
● All school nurses will have read the complete Medication 
Policy and 105 CMR 210.000- THE ADMINISTRATION OF 
PRESCRIPTION MEDICATIONS IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE 
SCHOOLS annually. 
● The school nurse, in collaboration with the parent or guardian, 
shall establish a medication administration plan for each 
student receiving medication, in accordance with the details of 
the full medication policy. 
● In accordance with standard nursing practice, the school nurse 
may refuse to administer, or allow to be administered, any 
medication which, based on their individual assessment and 
professional judgment, has the potential to be harmful, 
dangerous, or inappropriate.  In these cases, the 
parent/guardian and licensed prescriber shall be notified 
immediately by the school nurse and the reason for refusal 
explained. The school nurse will document the above in the 
electronic medical record (EMR).  
● Health Services administration is accountable for reviewing all 
aspects of medication administration and ensuring that the 
Massachusetts Standards of Nursing Practice are upheld.  
When inconsistencies are discovered, the school nurse will be 
counseled, and the head of school/principal informed.  When 
inadequacies continue (despite appropriate counseling and 
support), the issue and the measures taken will be 
documented in the nurse’s performance evaluation. Auditing 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 3 of 14 
 
will occur as part of routine site visit or as incidents deem 
necessary. 
Handling, Storage, and Disposal of Medications  
● All prescription medications shall lie stored in their original 
pharmacy or manufacturer labeled containers and, in such 
manner, as to render them safe and effective.  
● All prescription medications to be administered by school 
personnel shall be kept in a securely locked cabinet used 
exclusively for medications, which is kept locked except when 
opened to obtain medications. The medication cabinet is to be 
accessed solely by the school nurse. The cabinet shall be 
substantially constructed and anchored securely to a solid 
surface. Prescription medications requiring refrigeration shall 
be stored in either a locked box in a refrigerator or in a locked 
refrigerator maintained at temperatures of 38F to 42F. 
● Access to stored prescription medications shall be limited to 
persons authorized to administer prescription medications and 
to self-medicating students, to the extent permitted by school 
policy developed pursuant to 105 CMR 210.006(B)(8). Access to 
keys and knowledge of the location of keys shall be restricted 
to the maximum extent possible. Students who are self-
medicating shall not have access to other students’ 
medications.  
● Parents or guardians may retrieve the prescription 
medications from the school at any time. 
● No more than a 30 school-day supply of the prescription 
medication for a student shall be stored at the school.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 4 of 14 
 
● Where possible, all unused, discontinued, or outdated 
prescription medications shall be returned to the parent or 
guardian and the return appropriately documented. In 
extenuating circumstances, with parental consent, when 
possible, such prescription medications may be destroyed by 
the school nurse in accordance with any applicable policies of 
the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, Division of 
Food and Drugs. 
● The school nurse is responsible for maintaining the 
confidentiality of a students’ health record, including 
medications. Do not discuss or share information about 
students or medications with other school staff or people 
outside school unless directed to do so by the school nurse. 
Refer all questions or comments about students or 
medications to the school nurse. 
Medication Orders/Parental Consent 
● The school nurse shall ensure that there is a proper medication 
order from a licensed prescriber which is renewed annually 
and when changes are made to the orders. The 
parent/guardian must sign a consent for the administration of 
the medication every time a change is made. 
● A new order must be obtained at the beginning of the 
academic year for all daily medications/treatments and any 
PRN medications. 
● All students with medication orders should have a medication 
administration plan and an IHP.  
● Medication orders will be transcribed into the Electronic 
Medical Record (EMR) using the date the order was written by 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 5 of 14 
 
the prescriber until the end of the school year. (The official end 
of the school year is the last day of the Extended School Year 
(ESY) program.  
● A telephone order or an order for any change in medication 
shall be received only by the school nurse. Any such verbal 
order must be followed by a written order within three school 
days.  
● The prescriber Medication Order form should be used. It is 
recommended that the Boston Public Schools Medication 
Order Form be completed by the prescriber, as the form 
contains the necessary information about the medication. 
Orders may be accepted from a prescriber that has not used 
the BPS Medication Order form as long as all necessary 
information is on the letter or form. The parent/guardian must 
consent to the administration of medication in school. 
Reporting and Documentation of Medication Errors 
● A medication error includes any failure to administer 
medication as prescribed for a particular student, including 
failure to administer the medication:  
● within appropriate time frames (the appropriate time frame 
should be addressed in the medication administration plan)  
● in the correct dosage 
● in accordance with accepted practice 
● to the correct student 
In the event of a medication error, the school nurse shall notify 
the parent or guardian immediately. (The school nurse shall 
document the effort to reach the parent or guardian.) If there is a 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 6 of 14 
 
question of potential harm to the student, the nurse shall also 
notify the student's licensed prescriber or school physician.  
Medication errors shall be reported to the Health Services 
nursing leadership and documented by the school nurse utilizing 
the medication error report form. These reports shall be retained 
by Health Services leadership and within the student electronic 
health record where applicable. They shall be made available to 
the Department of Public Health upon request. 
All medication errors resulting in serious illness/injury requiring 
medical care shall be immediately reported to the Health 
Services leadership who will make the decision, as necessary, to 
further report to the Department of Public Health, Drug Control 
Program utilizing the Drug Incident Report.   
All suspected diversion or tampering of drugs shall be reported to 
the Health Services nursing leadership and to the Department of 
Public Health, Division of Food and Drugs.  
The school nurse shall review reports of medication errors and 
take necessary steps to ensure appropriate medication 
administration in the future.   
Over The Counter (OTC) Medications, i.e., Non-Prescription 
Medications 
● The school nurse shall follow the Board of Registration in 
Nursing protocols listed in their Advisory Ruling (AR) 
Medication Administration of Over-the-Counter Drugs (AR 92-
05) regarding required provider orders and safety steps in the 
administration of OTC medications in schools. (Board of 
Registration in Nursing Advisory Ruling 92-05  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 7 of 14 
 
● The school physician is responsible for the OTC Standing 
Orders policy, in consultation with the Office of Health Services 
nursing leadership and feedback from the school nurse body 
and will sign off on a standing order for administration of OTC 
medications (Appendix).   
● OTC medications may only be administered once during any 
school day (except as noted). If requested more than two times 
in any given week, or a pattern of regular usage develops, the 
school nurse will contact the parent/guardian for provider 
guidance per Standing Order protocol.  
● OTC medication may NOT be administered without parental 
permission. 
● A one-time dose of an OTC medication may be administered 
with verbal parental/guardian consent in the event that a 
paper consent form has not been signed, the parent/guardian 
must return a signed consent form within two school days 
following the administration for future administration.  
Herbal Preparations 
● Herbal preparations/medications are to be considered over-
the-counter medications and are subject to the same 
regulations and require parental permission.  
● Herbal preparations/medications must be listed in the U.S. 
Pharmacopeia (USP.org) in order to be given in school. 
● The OTC standing orders do not cover herbal 
preparations/medications and require a prescription from an 
appropriate and duly licensed prescriber. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 8 of 14 
 
Special Medication Situations 
● For short-term medications, i.e., those requiring administration 
for ten school days or fewer, the pharmacy-labeled container 
may be used in lieu of a licensed prescriber’s order.  
● Investigational new drugs may be administered in the schools 
with (a) a written order by a licensed prescriber, (b) written 
consent of the parent or guardian, and (c) a pharmacy-labeled 
container for dispensing.  If there is a question, the school 
nurse may seek consultation and/or approval from the school 
physician to administer the medication in the school setting.  
Controlled Substances 
● Students may require medications that fall under the category 
of “controlled substances.” 
● The detailed protocol for administration of controlled 
substances is in the BPS Nurses Protocol and Procedure 
Manual. 
Medications During Transport 
● Asthma exacerbations may occur while in transport.  A self-
medication plan would address this issue and allow for the 
child to carry and self-administer the medication without the 
supervision of the school nurse.  The student should be advised 
to report to the school nurse if they require treatment en route 
to or from school. 
●  Emergency medications, other than Epinephrine, cannot be 
administered by the bus driver/transportation monitor. The 
driver is expected to pull over and call 911 EMS if there is an 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 9 of 14 
 
emergent need and there are no licensed personnel 
accompanying the child.  
Anaphylaxis 
● Nurses, in conjunction with building administrators, MUST 
have a plan in place to ensure the safety of those children with 
life threatening allergies requiring the administration of 
Epinephrine. 
● In the event of a life-threatening, previously undiagnosed 
anaphylactic reaction, the school nurse may administer 
epinephrine in the protocol dosages.  
● The school physician is responsible for reviewing and renewing 
the anaphylaxis protocol on an annual basis.  
● Refer to Superintendent Circular SHS-11 “Life Threatening 
Allergies (LTA or Anaphylaxis)” for specifics.  
Asthma 
● If a child with known asthma has a severe exacerbation while 
at school and there is no order for medications administered 
via nebulizer from the child’s primary care provider, the nurse 
may administer a nebulizer or Metered Dose Inhaler (MDI) 
treatment, under the school physician’s order and according to 
the asthma protocol (BPS protocol and procedure manual). 
● The emergent use of nebulizer should occur within the context 
of the child’s primary or specialty care management. After the 
first episode of medication administered via nebulizer or MDI 
utilizing standing orders, every effort should be made to 
secure a treatment plan which includes use of PRN nebulizer 
with feedback to the family and/or the primary care provider. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 10 of 14 
 
● If there are no subsequent medication treatment orders from 
the patient’s primary care provider, the parent will be notified 
and 911 will be accessed in the event of an asthma 
exacerbation. 
Delegation/Supervision for Field Trips and Life-Threatening 
Allergic Reactions 
● The school nurse shall have final decision-making authority 
with respect to delegating administration of medications to 
unlicensed personnel in the school system. Boston Public 
Schools is registered with the Department of Public Health 
and has chosen to limit delegation to field trips only.  
● When medication administration is delegated by the school 
nurse to unlicensed school personnel, such personnel shall be 
under the supervision of the school nurse for the purposes of 
medication administration. 
● After consultation with the principal or administrator 
responsible for a given school, the school nurse shall be 
responsible to select, train, and supervise the school personnel 
approved by the school nurse to administer medications on 
field trips.  When necessary to protect student health and 
safety, the school nurse may rescind such selection. 
● A school nurse shall be on duty in the school system while 
medications are being administered by designated unlicensed 
school personnel, and available by telephone should 
consultation be required. 
● The administration of parenteral medications may not be 
delegated.  


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 11 of 14 
 
● Medications to be administered pursuant to PRN (“as needed”) 
orders may be delegated to be administered by authorized 
school personnel while on a field trip after an assessment by or 
consultation with the school nurse for each dose.   
Note: any medications that require a nursing assessment 
may not be delegated with the exception of asthma 
medications. 
● For each school, an updated list of unlicensed school 
personnel who have been trained in the administration of 
Epinephrine shall be maintained by the school nurse. Upon 
request, a parent shall be provided with a list of school 
personnel trained to administer medications on field trips and 
in life threatening cases. Note: It is the expectation that all 
school staff are trained by the school nurse in Epinephrine via 
an autoinjector administration twice a year and complete a 
return-demonstration to the nurse. 
● Designated, trained medication delegation school personnel 
shall be listed on the specific student’s medication 
administration plan.  
● Principals/head of school or the district department 
sponsoring the trips have the primary responsibility to ensure 
that all procedures pertaining to field trips are followed by 
their school and establish clear and transparts internal 
protocols for field trip requests and approvals at the school 
level. 
● Before approval of a field trip, the lead chaperone must consult 
with the school leader to determine if and what type of 
medical assistance is needed for participating students. To 
ensure accessibility, this step is crucial, and must take place 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 12 of 14 
 
before the field trip is secured. For additional questions, please 
consult the Health Services Department. Additionally, to 
thoroughly support a student's participation in a field trip, at 
least six weeks before departure (much longer for international 
and overnight field trip programs), consult with, and when 
necessary, receive training from the school nurse regarding 
any students who have medical needs. 
● Refer to Superintendent’s Circular CAO-22 General Guidelines 
and Procedures for All Field Trips for additional information. 
Self-Administration of Medications 
Consistent with school policy, students may self-administer 
prescription medication provided that certain conditions are met. 
For the purposes of 105 CMR 210.000, “self-administration” shall 
mean that the student is able to consume or apply prescription 
medication in the manner directed by the licensed prescriber, 
without additional assistance or direction.  
For a child to self-administer, the following must be in place: 
● Parent/guardian approval. 
● An assessment by the school nurse that the student is capable 
of self-medication administration. 
● The school nurse develops an individualized medication 
administration plan (105 CMR 210.005(E) for that student which 
is agreed to by the parent/guardian and contains: 
○ Documentation by a designated school personnel or by 
the student, when the student is assessed as capable by 
the school nurse, that medication was self-administered. 
○ Periodic review of process by school nurse 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 13 of 14 
 
○ Determines a safe place for storing the medication for the 
individual student, while providing for accessibility if the 
student’s health needs require it. 
○ Documentation of teacher’s and student’s knowledge of 
the medication dose, frequency, and side effects, the 
disease process for which the medication is being 
administered, the safety of the plan and the student’s 
ability to self-administer the medication, and the student’s 
compliance with the identified plan.  
● A medication order from a licensed prescriber for this student’s 
medication. 
● In the absence of a school nurse, the school administrator will 
contact a health services administrator to assist with the 
development of an appropriate plan of care which includes all 
the above.   
● All self-medication administration plans must be renewed 
annually. 
Health Services administration is accountable for reviewing all 
aspects of medication administration and ensuring that the 
Massachusetts Standards of Nursing Practice are upheld.  When 
inconsistencies are discovered, the school nurse will be 
counseled, and the head of school/principal informed. 
Summary of significant dates and deadlines: 
Month 
Activity 
January  
Send an updated list of nurses/schools 
to MA DPH.  
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-08 
Page 14 of 14 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent   


