Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
SHS-06 
Version 01 
 
 
 
IMMUNIZATION LAW 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
THE IMMUNIZATION REGULATIONS 
It is the policy of the Boston Public Schools to enforce the School 
Immunization Law, Chapter 76, Section 15, of the Massachusetts 
General Laws: 
“No child shall, except as hereinafter provided, be admitted to 
school except upon presentation of a physician's certificate that 
the child has been successfully immunized against diphtheria, 
pertussis, tetanus, measles and poliomyelitis and such other 
communicable diseases as may be specified from time to time by 
the department of public health. A child shall be admitted to 
school upon certification by a physician that he has personally 
examined such child and that in his opinion, the physical 
condition of the child is such that his health would be 
endangered by such vaccination or by any of such 
immunizations. Such certification shall be submitted at the 
beginning of each school year to the physician in charge of the 
school health program. If the physician in charge of the school 
health program does not agree with the opinion of the child's 
physician, the matter shall be referred to the department of 
public health, whose decision will be final. In the absence of an 
emergency or epidemic of disease declared by the department of 
public health, no child whose parent or guardian states in writing 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-06 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 
 
that vaccination or immunization conflicts with his sincere 
religious beliefs shall be required to present said physician's 
certificate in order to be admitted to school.”    
 
MCKINNEY-VENTO HOMELESS ASSISTANCE ACT 
Under the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, state and 
local educational agencies must ensure that homeless children 
and youths have equal access to the same free, appropriate 
public education, including a public preschool education, as 
provided to other children and youths. Children and youth who 
are homeless are to be enrolled in school, even if the child or 
youth is unable to produce records normally required for 
enrollment, such as previous academic records, medical records, 
proof of residency, or other documentation. If the child or youth 
needs to obtain immunizations, or immunization or medical 
records, the enrolling school shall immediately refer the parent or 
guardian of the child or youth to the local educational agency 
liaison who shall assist in obtaining necessary immunizations or 
medical records. 
 
PROTOCOL FOR ENFORCING IMMUNIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
New students, during the priority registration period: 
● Parents must bring proof of immunizations upon registering 
for school at all Welcome Center locations. 
● It is preferred that all students be up to date with all state-
required immunizations at the time of registration for the 
upcoming school year. If the child’s medical appointment 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-06 
Page 3 of 6 
 
 
 
falls between the priority registration period and September 
of the upcoming school year, the parent must provide a 
valid appointment card with all the following information on 
it: 
o registering student’s full name 
o registering student’s date of birth 
o name of the clinic/hospital where the appointment is 
scheduled. 
o date of the registering student’s appointment for 
vaccination and/or physical exam 
• If the student does not have the appropriate immunizations 
during the priority registration period, the student will be 
registered but will not be allowed to attend until the 
immunization documents are submitted to either the 
Welcome Center or the student’s assigned school prior to 
the start of school. 
• The type and number of immunizations vary with age and 
whether the student-initiated the immunization process 
after the age of 7 years or before. See attached state 
guidelines. 
 
New students, current rolling registration: 
• Parents must bring proof of immunizations upon registering 
for school at all Welcome Center locations. 
• All students must have all state-required immunizations at 
the time of registration in order to attend school during the 
current school year. In the event the child’s physical 
examination appointment falls after the date of registration, 
the parent must provide a valid appointment card with all 
the following information on it: 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-06 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 
 
o registering student’s full name 
o registering student’s date of birth 
o name of the clinic/hospital where the appointment is 
scheduled. 
o date of the registering student’s appointment for 
vaccination and/or physical exam 
● If the student is not up to date with immunizations prior to 
starting the current school year, the student will be 
registered but will not be allowed to attend until the 
immunization documents are submitted to either the 
Welcome Center, the Health Services Department, or the 
student’s assigned school.  
● The type and number of immunizations vary with age and 
whether the student-initiated the immunization process 
after the age of 7 years or before. See attached state 
guidelines. 
 
Continuing students: 
• All continuing students who are identified as being behind 
on immunizations will be notified that they will be excluded 
from school if there is no compliance with immunization 
updating. This is a necessary action because if there is a 
vaccine-preventable disease outbreak at the school (i.e., 
measles), all susceptible students and staff (i.e., those with 
no record of vaccination, disease, or blood test for immunity) 
MUST be excluded from school for the duration of the 
disease outbreak per the MA Department of Public Health 
and Boston Public Health Commission. 
• It is important to note that students whose immunization 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-06 
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
 
schedule has been interrupted and are in the process of 
being immunized (i.e., awaiting the next DPT/TD or polio 
dose and in the specified time interval between doses) may 
remain in school until the next dose is given. 
 
EXCEPTIONS 
ALL EXEMPTIONS RELIGIOUS/MEDICAL EXEMPTIONS MUST BE 
RENEWED ANNUALLY BY PARENT/GUARDIAN. 
• Students at any level whose parent or guardian provides a 
statement in writing that all immunizations or a specific 
immunization conflict with their sincere religious beliefs. 
• Students at any level who present a physician's certificate 
exempting a child from an immunization(s) due to a medical 
contraindication: the reason why an individual cannot 
medically receive the vaccine(s).  
 
The Massachusetts Department of Public Health has 
immunization recommendations based on grade. Please refer to 
the MDPH website for the current schedule and detailed 
immunization guidelines. 
Department 
Contact Information 
Health 
Services 
Office: 617-635-6788       Fax: 617-635-7937 
Welcome 
Services 
Office: 617-635-9085       Fax: 617-635-9703 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-06 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 
 
 
Date 
Activity 
September 
All new students and students entering grades, 
K2, 1, 4, 6, 10, 11 will be asked to provide an updated 
immunization record prior to the start of the 
school year in compliance with current 
Massachusetts Department of Public Health 
requirements. 
Monthly 
Letters will be sent to parents/guardians 
requesting immunization records for students 
with missing immunizations.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


