Page 1:
 
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
SHS-24 
Version 01 
 
DIAPERING AND TOILETING ACCIDENTS POLICY 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
BACKGROUND  
Toilet training typically occurs between 18 months and 3½ years 
of a child’s developmental stage.  
Individuals with disabilities may face more significant obstacles 
with toilet training than persons without diagnosed disabilities. 
This may be partly due to the individual’s challenges with 
communication, medicines, social interaction, sensory sensitivity, 
or making changes in their routine.  
Even for individuals without disabilities, toilet training can 
present both the caregiver and child with obstacles to immediate 
success, and most children will continue to have toileting 
accidents well beyond the time they stop wearing diapers.  
POLICY STATEMENT  
The Boston Public Schools acknowledges that toileting 
procedures should be planned based on individual children’s 
needs and be culturally appropriate according to the children’s 
families’ needs and beliefs. The Boston Public Schools staff will be 
aware of the diverse styles of toileting students due to cultural or 
religious practices. Program staff will use a variety of formal and 
informal strategies (including conversations) to become 


Page 2:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-24 
Page 2 of 6 
acquainted with and learn from families about their preferred 
child-rearing practices, including toilet training.  
The Boston Public Schools will be aware of and accommodate 
the need to maintain privacy for toileting and dressing.  
Boston Public Schools staff will interact in a positive manner 
during toileting procedures and support students in developing 
their self-help in this area.  
DIAPERING PROCEDURES  
Toileting accidents and diaper changing will ONLY be handled by 
a classroom teacher, classroom paraprofessional, and/or other 
adult designated by the school principal. Parents will not be 
required to change diapers and volunteers will not change 
diapers and/or assist with toileting at the school site during 
school hours.  
Each school year, the principal will complete and sign off on a 
form that states in writing who is designated to help students 
with toileting and changing diapers and who will help children 
with toileting accidents (see attached form). 
It is not the responsibility of the school nurse to assist with 
toileting and diaper changes, except for caring for students who 
have an ostomy/colostomy, require urinary catheterization, or 
have other genito-urinary diagnosis. 
 
 


Page 3:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-24 
Page 3 of 6 
Staff will follow these diapering procedures:  
● Staff to assess children for signs that diapers or pull-ups are 
wet or contain feces at least every two hours when children 
are awake and when children awaken from a rest period.  
● Diapers are changed when wet or soiled.  
● Children wearing cloth or disposable training pants and 
children who have accidents. 
● Changing should be initiated within 5 minutes of discovery 
that they are wet or soiled unless circumstances clearly 
make it unreasonably difficult to do so.  
● Staff will change children’s diapers or soiled underwear in 
the designated changing areas and not elsewhere in the 
facility.  
In the changing area, staff post and follow these procedures for 
changing diapers or pull-ups:  
● At all times, caregivers have a hand on the child to ensure 
safety is maintained when the child is being changed on an 
elevated surface.  
● Bring supplies (e.g., clean diaper, wipes, diaper cream, 
gloves, plastic or waterproof bag for soiled clothing, extra 
clothes) to the diapering/changing area.  
● Diaper cream (provided by the family): if used, dispense it 
onto a tissue and/or cotton ball and cover the diaper 
changing surface with disposable liner (paper or chuck).  
● Put on gloves.  
 
 


Page 4:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-24 
Page 4 of 6 
● Changing table, if used: place the child on a diapering 
surface and unfasten diaper. Keep one hand on the child at 
all times.  
● Clean the child with disposable wipes. Always wipe front to 
back.  
● Keep soiled diapers/clothing away from any surfaces that 
cannot be easily cleaned. 
● Securely bag soiled clothing.  
● Place used wipes in the soiled diaper or pull-up.  
● Put the soiled diaper/pull-up into two plastic bags and tie up 
the bags.  
● Discard the bags with the soiled diaper/pull-up and wipes in 
the covered trash can.  
● Remove and discard gloves.  
● Apply diaper cream, if needed, with a tissue and/or cotton 
ball or a freshly gloved finger.  
● Put on a fresh diaper or help the child put on a fresh pull-up 
or clean clothes.  
● Help the child to get dressed. Wash the child’s hands with 
soap and water and place them in a safe, supervised area.  
● When a diaper changing table is used:  
o Remove liner from the changing surface and discard in 
the trash can.  
o Wipe up any visible soil with damp paper towels or a 
baby wipe.  
o Clean the entire surface with disinfectant.  
o Wash your hands with soap and water.  


Page 5:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-24 
Page 5 of 6 
RESOURCES 
● BPS Department of Early Childhood  
● BPS Department of Special Education 
● NAEYC Early Learning Program Accreditation Standards  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


Page 6:
 
 
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-24 
Page 6 of 6 
 
Adults Designated to Change Diapers, Assist Students with 
Toileting, and/or Assist Children with Toileting Accidents 
School:  
 
School Year:  
 
Name 1: 
 
Position:  
 
Name 2: 
 
Position: 
 
 
Name 3: 
 
Position: 
 
Name 4: 
 
Position: 
 
 
Principal Signature: 
 
Date: 
 
 


