Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SHS-04 
Version 01 
 
 
 
INFECTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL IN  
SCHOOL SETTINGS  
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
Schools can minimize the risk of disease transmission through 
student and staff awareness and simple infection control 
practices at the school and classroom level. 
MODES OF TRANSMISSION 
Diseases have different modes of transmission. Diseases can be 
spread through direct contact, indirect contact, droplet, or 
airborne transmission. The following guidelines minimize the 
risks for all modes of transmission.  
The single most important step in preventing exposure to and 
transmission of any infection is anticipating contact with 
infectious materials in routine as well as emergency situations. 
Based on the type of possible contact, the responder should be 
prepared to use the appropriate precautions and techniques 
prior to providing care. Diligent and proper hand washing, the 
use of barriers, appropriate disposal of waste products and 
needles, and proper decontamination measures will enhance 
protection of students and staff. 
 
 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 2 of 14 
 
 
 
UNIVERSAL (STANDARD) PRECAUTIONS 
The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) have long recommended 
"universal blood and body-fluid precautions" to prevent 
transmission of hepatitis B, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), 
and other infections, as well as to decrease the risk for exposure 
to responders and students. As it is not possible to identify all 
infected individuals, these precautions must be used with every 
student. Universal precautions pertain to all blood and body 
fluids. For bloodborne infections, these precautions do not apply 
to other body fluids and material, such as saliva, sputum, feces, 
tears, nasal secretions, vomitus, and urine, unless blood is visible 
in the materials. However, these other fluids and body wastes can 
be sources of other infections and should be handled as if they 
are infectious, utilizing the same precautions. This is the basis of 
standard precautions to be used with all body fluids, blood, and 
other potentially infectious material. 
TRANSMISSION BASED PRECAUTIONS 
The CDC has recommended “transmission-based precautions” as 
the second tier of basic infection control, to be used in addition to 
standard precautions for individuals who may be infected or 
colonized with certain infectious agents for which additional 
precautions are needed to prevent infection transmission.  
Contact Precautions 
Use contact precautions for those with known or suspected 
infections that represent an increased risk for contact 
transmission. Proper personal protective equipment (PPE) 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 3 of 14 
 
 
 
includes the use of gloves and gown for all interactions that may 
involve contact with the student or the student’s environment.  
Droplet Precautions 
Use droplet precautions for students known or suspected to be 
infected with pathogens transmitted by respiratory droplets 
generated by coughing, sneezing, or talking. Proper personal 
protective equipment (PPE) includes the use of masks, both for 
the patient and school nurse, during all interactions. 
Airborne Precautions 
Use airborne precautions for those individuals known or 
suspected to be infected with pathogens transmitted by the 
airborne route (e.g., COVID-19, tuberculosis, measles, chickenpox, 
disseminated herpes zoster). Proper PPE includes a fit-tested, 
NIOSH-approved N95 or higher level of respiratory protection for 
healthcare personnel and a mask on the patient.  
RESPIRATORY HYGIENE 
In addition to spread by bodily fluids, infections can be spread by 
respiratory droplets that are generated when people sneeze, 
cough, laugh, or exhale. Respiratory hygiene is a term adopted by 
the CDC and Massachusetts Department of Public Health 
(MDPH) to describe measures that can be taken to decrease the 
risk for spreading respiratory illnesses by droplet and airborne 
transmission. A universal “respiratory hygiene/cough etiquette” 
policy includes: 
• Covering the mouth and nose with a tissue when coughing 
or sneezing 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 4 of 14 
 
 
 
• Disposing of used tissues in a wastebasket 
• Practicing hand hygiene (washing) often 
• Coughing or sneezing into elbow 
HAND WASHING 
Proper hand washing is crucial to preventing the spread of 
infection. Use of running water, lathering with soap, and using 
friction to clean all surfaces of the hands are key. Rinse well with 
running water and dry hands with paper towels. If soap and 
water are unavailable, hand sanitizer may be used. 
• Hands should be washed before physical contact with 
students and after the contact is completed. 
• Hands should be washed after contact with any used 
equipment. If hands (or other skin) become soiled with 
blood or body fluids, they should be washed immediately 
before touching anything else.  
• Hands should be washed whether gloves are worn or not 
and after gloves are removed. 
• Textured jewelry on the hands or wrists (such as rings and 
stones) should be removed prior to washing and kept off 
until completion of the care procedure and hands are 
rewashed. 
 
 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 5 of 14 
 
 
 
BARRIER PROTECTION 
Barriers include disposable gloves, protective eyewear, and gown. 
The use of a barrier is intended to reduce the risk for contact with 
blood and body fluids for the caregiver, as well as to control the 
spread of infectious agents from student to student. It is essential 
that appropriate barriers be used when contact with potentially 
infectious material is possible. Gloves should be worn when direct 
care of the student may involve contact with blood and body 
fluids, as well for contact with urine, feces, and respiratory 
secretions. Gloves should be disposed of after each use and not 
reused. 
Gloves should be worn: 
• When changing a diaper or catheterizing a student 
• When changing dressings or sanitary napkins 
• When providing mouth, nose, or tracheal care 
• If the caregiver has broken skin on the hands (even around 
the nails) 
• When cleaning up spills of blood (e.g., nosebleeds), body 
fluids and wastes, and soiled supplies 
Gowns or aprons may be worn to protect the caregiver's clothing 
if spattering of body fluids is possible. The apron or gown should 
be laundered or disposed of after each care session and should 
not be reused. 
In addition, protective eye wear and masks should be worn if 
splashing of body fluids is likely to occur (such as mouth 
suctioning or care of a student who is coughing). 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 6 of 14 
 
 
 
Chux or other waterproof barriers should be used to cover any 
work surface if drainage or splashing with blood or body fluids 
are possible. The barrier should be disposed of after each care 
session and should not be reused. 
DISPOSAL OF WASTE 
All used or contaminated supplies (including gloves and other 
barriers) except for syringes, needles, and other sharp 
implements should be placed in a plastic bag which is then 
sealed. This bag should be placed in a second plastic bag, which 
is also sealed. The double-bagged waste can then be thrown in 
the garbage, out of the reach of children or animals. Bodily 
wastes such as urine, vomitus, or feces should be disposed of in 
the toilet. 
Needles, syringes, and other sharp objects should be immediately 
placed in FDA-cleared sharps disposal containers. To reduce the 
risk of an accidental needle stick or cut, needles should not be 
recapped, bent, or removed from the syringe before disposal. 
Once it is full, the container should be sealed and brought to 
Health Services central administration for disposal in a large 
biohazard container. Health Services will arrange for pickup by a 
biohazard waste disposal company for proper disposal at least 
annually. 
CLEANUP PROCEDURES 
Spills of blood and body fluids that are covered under standard 
precautions should be cleaned up immediately.  
   


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 7 of 14 
 
 
 
The CDC method of clean-up is as follows: 
• Wear gloves. 
• Mop up the spill with paper towels or other absorbent 
material. 
• Using a solution of one-part household bleach (sodium 
hypochlorite) in ten parts of water; wash the area well. 
• Dispose of gloves, soiled towels, and other waste in a sealed 
double plastic bag in the garbage as outlined above. 
Routine environmental clean-up procedures for facilities (such as 
the health room and bathrooms) does not require any 
modification unless contamination with blood or body fluids 
should occur. If so, the area should be decontaminated using the 
procedure outlined above. Regular cleaning of surfaces which are 
not visibly contaminated with potentially infectious material, 
such as toilet seats and tabletops, can be done with the standard 
cleaning and removal of obvious soil.  
LAUNDRY PROCEDURES 
Whenever possible, disposable barriers should be used if 
contamination with body fluids or blood is possible. If sheets, 
towels, or clothing become soiled, they should be handled as 
little as possible. Wash with hot water and detergent for at least 
25 minutes. Cool water washing is also acceptable if an 
appropriate detergent is used for the water temperature. 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 8 of 14 
 
 
 
PREGNANT WOMEN 
Pregnant women are at no higher risk for infection than other 
care-providers as long as appropriate precautions are observed. 
However, due to the possibility of in-utero transmission of viral 
infections such as cytomegalovirus (CMV) or HIV, as well as the 
potential for adverse outcomes with certain infections, pregnant 
women should be especially careful to observe standard 
precautions. 
GENERAL INFECTION CONTROL PROCEDURES 
The purpose of the procedures outlined herein is to establish 
basic guidelines to address the role of staff in all incidents 
requiring concern about infection control. Such incidents may 
include, but not be limited to, a bleeding nose, sneezing, 
coughing, uncontrollable urinating, and sudden bowel 
movement. 
Head of school/principal shall: 
• Ensure that all staff are familiar with this policy and that the 
provisions of this policy are implemented. 
Classroom teacher shall: 
• Encourage the use of class wide respiratory hygiene, 
especially during flu season and other respiratory illness 
upticks. 
• Reassure and calm students involved in hygiene 
emergencies. 
• Notify the school nurse of any infectious disease concerns. 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 9 of 14 
 
 
 
• Notify custodians of infection control needs 
School nurse shall: 
• Review infection control procedures annually at the 
beginning of the school year with classroom staff. 
• Assist the classroom staff in developing hygiene plans 
appropriate for the classroom as well as individual students. 
• Notify Health Services of cases and possible clusters. 
School custodian shall: 
• Refer to and follow the steps identified in Superintendent 
Circular FMT-19 for cleaning related to possible infectious 
bodily fluids.  
 BITE EMERGENCY PROCEDURES 
The purpose of the procedures outlined herein is to establish 
basic guidelines intended to assist students and staff who have 
encountered a human or animal bite that breaks the skin. 
Background information for human bites: 
Biting is very common among young children but usually does 
not lead to any serious infectious disease concerns. If the skin is 
punctured or broken, bacteria may be introduced into the wound 
that can lead to blood-borne infection which needs to be treated 
by a healthcare professional. Blood-borne infection could be of 
concern if the biter breaks the skin and blood is drawn into the 
biter’s mouth or if the biter has bleeding gums or mouth sores. 
Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C and HIV are some pathogens of concern 
although the risk of transmission of these viruses is very low in 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 10 of 14 
 
 
 
school settings. For HIV, there have not been any reported cases 
of transmission in school settings.  
The “biter” might be considered at higher risk than the “bitee” 
due to the exposure to the blood from the wound if the skin is 
broken. Each human bite represents a unique set of 
circumstances and requires an individualized response. In most 
biting episodes there are no communicable disease extenuating 
circumstances, and the episodes are treated with standard 
precautions. There is a heightened sense of urgency when one of 
the children has a communicable disease. The school nurse is 
responsible for guiding the response, working with the 
headmaster/principal, and ensuring that confidentiality is 
maintained.  
Background information for animal bites: 
Animal bites are common since children can behave 
unpredictably and animals have normal protective instincts. An 
animal bite that breaks or punctures the skin will require 
immediate medical attention due to the risk of bacterial and viral 
infection. The longer the animal’s mouth germs stay in the 
wound, the greater the risk of potential infection that will require 
antibiotics.  
Animals can also transmit rabies, a very serious viral infection 
that infects the nervous system. Although any mammal bite can 
transmit rabies, the bites of some wild animals (e.g., bats, 
raccoons, skunks, foxes, coyotes) and some stray and 
unvaccinated pet dogs and cats are of greatest concern. Wild 
animals should not be kept or allowed to visit schools. All 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 11 of 14 
 
 
 
suspected animal bites should be promptly reported to public 
health authorities by Health Services.  
In the event of an animal or human bite that breaks the skin: 
Principal/head of school shall: 
• Ensure that all staff are familiar with this policy and that the 
provisions of this policy are implemented. 
Classroom teacher shall: 
• Reassure and calm the students. 
• Employ standard precautions in evaluating the bite. 
• Notify the school nurse immediately. 
• Have the student wash the area with soap and water 
immediately. 
• Report action taken to the headmaster/principal. 
For human bites, school nurse shall: 
• Provide first aid to the child who was bitten by washing any 
broken skin and applying a cold compress to any bruise. 
• Review known medical information of both the “biter” and 
the “bitee.” If there is a known communicable disease issue, 
the nurse must consult with Health Services administration 
for more specific guidance. Confidentiality must be 
respected throughout the consultation. 
• Contact the student's parent/guardian to report the incident 
and recommend next steps. 
• Refer both the “biter” and “bitee” to their primary care 
provider for further guidance. This may include any or all the 
following: risk counseling; hepatitis and HIV testing; 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 12 of 14 
 
 
 
prophylaxis. The treatment approach is at the discretion of 
the primary care provider and the family. 
• Notify Health Services prior to calling the families if there is a 
known communicable disease issue with one or both 
students. 
• Be a liaison to the primary care provider as requested by the 
parent and within the boundaries of confidentiality. 
• Document the incident in SNAP for students. If a staff 
member was involved, the staff member must file a Report 
of Injury Form [see Superintendent’s Circular HRS-PP07, 
Worker’s Compensation Procedures] within 7 days. 
For animal bites, school nurse shall: 
• Immediately provide first aid to the child who was bitten by 
washing any broken skin and applying a cold compress to 
any bruise. 
• Notify Health Services prior to calling parent/guardian. An 
animal bite that breaks or punctures the skin needs 
immediate wound care to reduce the risk of infection. All 
animal bites should be reported within 24 hours. 
• Contact the student's parent/guardian to report the incident 
and recommend next steps. 
• Refer the student to their primary care provider for further 
guidance. The treatment approach is at the discretion of the 
primary care provider and the family. 
• Be a liaison to the primary care provider as requested by the 
parent and within the boundaries of confidentiality. 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 13 of 14 
 
 
 
EMPLOYEE NEEDLESTICK MANAGEMENT 
When a needlestick occurs: 
•  Gently bleed the area, wash, and immediately flush with 
soap and water. 
• The employee who has had the needle stick should call their 
primary care provider. 
• If the risk assessment of the primary care provider and/or 
school nurse is that the needle stick represents an exposure 
to blood or body fluids, it is advisable that the employee 
seek management at an emergency department that can 
provide the latest in prophylactic management; the 
employee’s primary care provider will be able to assist with 
this. 
• Health Services should be notified for further guidance. 
• The employee should complete an incident report and 
Worker’s Compensation form after the situation has been 
stabilized. 
LIST OF TERMS USED ABOVE 
Blood-borne infection: infectious germs present in blood that can 
cause disease in humans.  
Communicable disease: an illness caused by an infectious agent 
or its toxins that occurs through the direct or indirect 
transmission of the infectious agent or its products from an 
infected individual or via an animal to a susceptible animal or 
human host. 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-04 
Page 14 of 14 
 
 
 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT DATES AND DEADLINES 
Date 
Activity 
September 2024  
All staff should have universal precaution 
review by school nurse 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Fax: 
617-635-7937 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


