Page 1:
Superintendent’s
Circular
NUMBER:
SUP-19
Version 01
DE-ESCALATION, PHYSICAL RESTRAINT,
SECLUSION AND TIME-OUT POLICY
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded
by a subsequent version.
I. INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this circular is to ensure that every student
participating in a Boston Public Schools program is free from the
use of physical restraint inconsistent with state law and district
policy and to ensure that physical restraint is used only in
emergency situations of last resort, after other lawful and less
intrusive alternatives have failed or been deemed inappropriate,
and with extreme caution. The purpose of the circular is also to
state that the use of seclusion is prohibited by law and in the
Boston Public Schools. This circular is consistent with regulations
established by the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and
Secondary Education, 603 CMR 46.00 and with school district
policy.
The Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary
Education established regulations governing the use of physical
restraints on students. These regulations supersede all previously
established procedures. The Boston Public Schools must follow
the provisions of 603 CMR 46.00, which regulates physical
restraint on students in Massachusetts public school districts,
charter schools, and collaborative and special education schools.


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 2 of 35
Physical restraint should be administered only when needed to
protect a student or other students and staff from assault or
imminent danger of serious physical harm. Physical restraint
should be administered in the least intrusive manner possible
and should be used to prevent or minimize harm to the student.
Boston Public Schools does not use Seclusion. Seclusion shall
mean the involuntary confinement of a student alone in a room
or area from which the student is physically prevented from
leaving. Seclusion does not include a time-out, which shall mean
a behavioral support strategy developed pursuant to 603 CMR
46.04(1) in which a student temporarily separates from the
learning activity or the classroom, either by choice or by direction
from staff, for the purpose of calming. During time-out, a student
must be continuously observed by a staff member. Staff shall be
with the student or immediately available to the student at all
times. The space used for time-out must be clean, safe, sanitary,
and appropriate for the purpose of calming. Time-out shall cease
as soon as the student has calmed and no time-out can exceed
30 minutes without the express approval of the School Leader or
their designee.
II. DEFINITIONS
Mechanical restraint shall mean the use of any physical device or
equipment to restrict a student's freedom of movement.
Mechanical restraint does not include devices implemented by
trained school personnel, or utilized by a student that have been
prescribed by an appropriate medical or related services
professional, and are used for the specific and approved


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 3 of 35
positioning or protective purposes for which such devices were
designed. Examples of such devices include: adaptive devices or
mechanical supports used to achieve proper body position,
balance, or alignment to allow greater freedom of mobility than
would be possible without the use of such devices or mechanical
supports; vehicle safety restraints when used as intended during
the transport of a student in a moving vehicle; restraints for
medical immobilization; or orthopedically prescribed devices that
permit a student to participate in activities without risk of harm.
*BPS prohibits this type of restraint*
Medication restraint shall mean the administration of
medication for the purpose of temporarily controlling behavior.
Medication prescribed by a licensed physician and authorized by
the parent/guardian for administration in the school setting is not
medication restraint. *BPS prohibits this type of restraint*
Physical escort shall mean a temporary touching or holding,
without the use of force, of the hand, wrist, arm, shoulder, or
back for the purpose of inducing a student who is agitated to
walk to a safe location.
Physical restraint shall mean direct physical contact that
prevents or significantly restricts a student's freedom of
movement. Physical restraint does not include: brief physical
contact to promote student safety, providing physical guidance
or prompting when teaching a skill, redirecting attention,
providing comfort, or a physical escort.
Prone restraint shall mean a physical restraint in which a student
is placed face down on the floor or another surface, and physical


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 4 of 35
pressure is applied to the student's body to keep the student in
the face-down position. *BPS prohibits this type of restraint*
Seclusion shall mean the involuntary confinement of a student
alone in a room or area from which the student is physically
prevented from leaving. Seclusion does not include a time-out as
defined in 603 CMR 46.02. *Seclusion is prohibited in public
schools and in BPS*
Time-out shall mean a behavioral support strategy developed
pursuant to 603 CMR 46.04(1) in which a student temporarily
separates from the learning activity or the classroom, either by
choice or by direction from staff, for the purpose of calming.
During time-out, a student must be continuously observed by a
staff member. Staff shall be with the student or immediately
available to the student at all times. The space used for time-out
must be clean, safe, sanitary, and appropriate for the purpose of
calming. Time-out shall cease as soon as the student has calmed
and no time-out can exceed 20 minutes without the express
approval of the School Leader or their designee.
III. PHYSICAL RESTRAINT PROCEDURES
A. METHODS FOR PREVENTING VIOLENCE AND ENGAGING
PARENTS/GUARDIANS
The BPS Behavioral Health Services department has school
psychologists assigned to all BPS schools and has social
workers that provide district-wide services. The Behavioral


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 5 of 35
Health Services department provides a wide continuum of
behavioral health services including prevention, at-risk and
intensive services. In addition, the Behavioral Health Services
team is the mental health crisis response team for the
district and works with educational staff to identify and
respond to unsafe situations.
In addition, BPS has developed a multi-tiered system of
supports for preventing student violence, self-injurious
behavior, and suicide, including individual crisis planning
and de-escalation of potentially dangerous behavior
occurring among groups of students or with an individual
student. The Comprehensive Behavioral Health Model
(CBHM) is a multi-tiered system of supports (MTSS) designed
to promote students' social, emotional, and behavioral
wellbeing. MTSS is a three-tier model of service delivery for
educational and behavioral services in a school setting. This
model is also often called Response to Intervention (RtI). In
BPS, the Academic Achievement Framework (AAF) is a
version of RtI focused on students' social and behavioral
learning. CBHM is focused on students' social and behavioral
learning. The goal of the CBHM Lighthouse model is to
create safe and supportive learning environments in which
students may grow and thrive academically, personally, and
socially. This includes providing the right amount of services
and supports at the right time when a student absolutely
needs them.
These models are based on the logic that the majority of
students can and will be successful when provided with
evidence-informed instruction and preventative


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 6 of 35
interventions. Appropriate interventions and the use of data
to assess progress help ensure that students who benefit
from progressively more intensive services will not need
them over the long-term.
BPS engages with parents and caregivers at a school level,
through the Guide for Families and Students and through
the Special Education Parent Advisory Council (or SEPAC) to
engage parents and caregivers in discussions about restraint
prevention and the use of restraint solely as an emergency
procedure.
B. USE OF RESTRAINT
Physical restraint should be administered only when needed
to protect a student or other students and staff from assault
or imminent serious physical harm. Physical restraint can
only be used as a last resort in an emergency when a
student’s behavior poses a threat of imminent, serious
physical harm to himself or herself or others, and the
student does not respond to verbal directives or other lawful
and less intrusive behavior interventions, or such
interventions are deemed inappropriate under the
circumstances. Physical restraint shall be limited to the use
of such reasonable force as is necessary, for the least
amount of time necessary, to protect a student or another
member of the school community from assault or imminent,
serious, physical harm. A physical restraint may only be


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 7 of 35
administered by school personnel who have been properly
trained in the use of physical restraint.
C. USE OF TIME-OUT
Seclusion does not include a time-out. A time-out is not a
restraint. A time-out is a behavioral support strategy in
which a student temporarily separates from the learning
activity or the classroom, either by choice or by direction
from staff, for the purpose of calming. Time-outs are
permitted as a behavioral strategy if the student is with a
staff member or is continuously observed by a staff member
who is immediately available to the student at all times. The
space used for time-out must be clean, safe, sanitary, and
appropriate for the purpose of calming. Time-out shall cease
as soon as the student has calmed. Time-out may not be
used for discipline or punishment. The preference is for
time-out to be implemented within a classroom to the
greatest extent possible. Staff must document in Aspen the
antecedent behavior prior to the time-out, any other
behavioral support strategies attempted, and the time, date,
duration and location of any time-out used as a behavioral
support strategy. The school leader must give and
document approval for any time-out to continue more than
30 minutes based on the individual student's continuing
agitation.


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 8 of 35
D. OTHER LIMITATIONS ON USE OF RESTRAINT
Physical restraint shall be limited to using such reasonable
force as is necessary to protect a student or another
member of the school community from assault or imminent,
serious, physical harm. 603 CMR 46.03(3).
Instances when restraint is not to be used:
1. Physical restraint is not to be used as a means of
discipline or punishment. 603 CMR
46.03(2)(a).
2. Physical restraint is not to be used when the student
cannot be safely restrained because it is medically
contraindicated for reasons including but not limited to
asthma, seizures, cardiac condition, obesity, bronchitis,
communication-related disabilities, or risk of vomiting.
603 CMR 46.03(2)(b).
3. Physical restraint is not to be used as a response to the
destruction of property, school disruption, refusal of the
student to comply with public education program rules
or staff directive, or verbal threats when those actions
do not constitute a threat of assault, or imminent,
serious, physical harm. 603 CMR 46.03(2)(c).
4. Physical restraint should not be used as a standard
response for any individual student. No written
individual behavior plan or individualized education
program (IEP) may include the use of physical restraint


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 9 of 35
as a standard response to any behavior. 603 CMR
46.03(2)(d).
5. Boston Public Schools prohibits the following forms of
restraint: mechanical, medication, seclusion, prone, and
prone restraints.
Nothing in this document, or in 603 CMR 46.00, prohibits:
1. the right of an individual to report to appropriate
authorities a crime committed by a student or another
individual.
2. law enforcement, judicial authorities, or school security
personnel from exercising their responsibilities,
including the physical detainment of a student or other
persons alleged to have committed a crime or posing a
security risk.
3. the exercise of an individual’s responsibilities as a
mandated reporter of child abuse/neglect according to
MGL c. 119, s 51A to the appropriate state agency.
4. the protection afforded publicly funded students under
other state or federal laws, including those laws that
provide for the rights of students who have been found
eligible to receive special education or related services.


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 10 of 35
E. PROPER ADMINISTRATION OF PHYSICAL RESTRAINT
●Restraint must be implemented only by trained and
actively certified personnel. Whenever possible, the
restraint shall be witnessed by at least one person who
did not engage in the restraint. As an exception, in the
event of an emergency situation where no trained staff
are available to protect students and staff from imminent
harm, the restraint may be implemented until properly
trained staff have arrived.
●Restraints must be implemented in a way that does not
prevent a student from breathing or speaking.
●The use of unnecessary force in administering physical
restraint is expressly prohibited. Intervening staff can use
only the amount of force necessary to protect the
students or others from physical injury. Staff shall select
the safest and least intrusive method that is likely to be
effective for the student.
●If a student indicates or is observed to be in significant
physical distress (difficulty breathing, signs or indicators
of pain or discomfort, change in color or alertness, etc.),
the student shall be released immediately, and medical
assistance should be sought.
●Students shall be released from physical restraint as soon
as it is safe to do so, meaning that the student is no
longer a danger to themselves or others and/or a plan has
been made to manage the student safely without having
to use physical management.


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 11 of 35
●In the rare event that a student is in crisis for more than
20 minutes, restraints over 20 minutes must have
approval from the school leader. The school leader must
document that approval was granted for any restraint
over 20 minutes.
●Follow up procedures following restraint must be
implemented. These include a debrief with the student (if
appropriate), a review of the incident with staff, and any
needed follow up with student witnesses.
●The school nurse should assess the student’s physical
condition after any restraint.
F. SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
Pursuant to 603 CMR 46.05(5), the following is required:
1. A restraint shall not be administered in a manner that
prevents the student from speaking or breathing.
2. A restraint shall be administered in such a way to
prevent or minimize physical harm.
3. During a restraint, a staff member shall continuously
monitor the physical status of the student including
skin temperature and color, and respiration.
4. If at any time during the restraint the student
expresses or demonstrates significant physical distress
including, but not limited to, difficulty breathing, the
restraint will immediately terminate, and medical
assistance will be sought.


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 12 of 35
5. Program staff will review and consider any known
medical or psychological limitations, known or
suspected trauma history, and/or behavioral
intervention plans regarding the use of physical
restraint on an individual student.
6. During a restraint, staff will continuously talk to and
engage the student in an attempt to de-escalate
behavior and to end the restraint as soon as possible.
7. Staff administering physical restraint will use the safest
method available that is appropriate to the situation.
8. If a student is restrained for a period longer than 20
minutes, program staff shall obtain approval from the
school leader. The approval shall be based upon the
student’s continued agitation during the restraint
justifying the need for continued restraint.
9. After the release of a student from restraint, the
incident, when applicable, will be reviewed with the
student and the behavior that led up to the restraint
will be addressed.
10.
The staff person(s) who administered the restraint
will also have a review to discuss whether proper
restraint procedures were followed and consider
whether any follow-up is appropriate for students who
witnessed the incident.


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 13 of 35
IV. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
A. FOLLOWING EACH RESTRAINT
Following the use of any physical intervention of any
duration that meets the definition of physical restraint under
DESE regulations, several steps must be taken to notify
appropriate parties and report the restraint in both BPS and
DESE systems:
●Notify School Administration: Notify school
administration verbally as soon as possible, and provide
written report by the next school working day. In the
event that the school leader was involved in the
restraint, the restraint must be reported to the School
Superintendent or Operational Leader within the same
timeline.
●Notify Parents/Guardians: The school leader or
director of the program notifies the parent/guardian
verbally as soon as possible (by the end of the day of
incident), and by written report in the language of the
home to an email provided by the parent/guardian or
by regular mail postmarked within 3 working days of
the incident. The written report shall include:
○Student information, the names of those involved
in the restraint, and observer names (if any). The
report will also include the name of the
administrator notified if the event went beyond 20
minutes.


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 14 of 35
○Date and time of the restraint, including
beginning and ending timesA brief summary of
the event in progress at the time of restraint, the
immediate antecedent to the challenging
behavior, efforts/attempts at de-escalation, any
alternatives to restraint tried, and documentation
of any injuries to staff or students. The summary
should also include description of the holds used
and why they were necessary, any reaction of the
student to the restraint, how the restraint ended.
○Any further actions taken by the school,
opportunities for the parent/guardian to discuss
the restraint, any consequences that may be
imposed on the student, or any other related
matter.
Important note: The school leader will print a copy of
the same report submitted to DESE (see “Report to
DESE” below) as written documentation of the
restraint and email or mail it to the parent/guardian.
The report to DESE should contain the required
information listed above.
●Record in Aspen: a conduct incident must be recorded
in Aspen within 24 hours, detailing attempts to
de-escalate, provide limits, type of restraint used and
duration. The use of restraint should be added as a
conduct action of “Restraint-Physical.”
●Report to DESE: all restraints must also be reported to
DESE via the DESE Security Portal


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 15 of 35
(https://gateway.edu.state.ma.us/edu/myportal/meoe)
within three business days. The school leader is
responsible for ensuring that all reporting timelines are
adhered to and that the restraint is uploaded to the
portal in a timely manner.
○In the event of an injury during restraint, a copy of
the written report must be sent to DESE within
three school working days. In addition, the school
must also send the copy of the record of restraints
maintained by the school leader for the 30-day
period before the date of the reported incident.
The program will be notified of any additional
steps needed within 30 calendar days of receipt of
the reports.
B. DATA REVIEW
1. Individual Student Review
The school leader shall conduct a weekly review of the
data to identify any students who have been restrained
multiple times that week. If students are identified as
having been involved in multiple restraints in a week, the
school leader will convene a support team to:
(a) review and discussion of the written reports
submitted in accordance with 603 CMR 46.06 and any
comments provided by the student and
parent/guardian about such reports and the use of the
restraints;


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 16 of 35
(b) an analysis of the circumstances leading up to each
restraint, including factors such as time of day, day of
the week, antecedent events, and individuals involved;
(c) consideration of factors that may have contributed
to escalation of behaviors, consideration of alternatives
to restraint, including de-escalation techniques and
possible interventions, and such other strategies and
decisions as appropriate, with the goal of reducing or
eliminating the use of restraint in the future;
​
(d) agreement on a written plan of action by the
program.
*If the school leader directly participated in the restraint, a
duly qualified individual designated by the superintendent
or board of trustees shall lead the review team's
discussion. The school leader shall ensure that a record of
each individual student review is maintained and made
available for review by the Department or the
parent/guardian, upon request.
2. Monthly School-Wide Review
The school leader will complete a monthly review of all
school-wide restraint data. The review should look for
patterns like time of day or day of week, individuals
involved, types of restraints or durations for specific
students, duration of restraints, and the number and
types of injuries. Based on this review, the school leader
may decide that updates or retraining are needed or any
other actions needed with the goal of reducing or


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 17 of 35
eliminating restraints
V. TRAINING REQUIREMENTS
A. FOR ALL STAFF
The laws of MA require that all school district staff that
interact with students receive an annual Prevention of
Restraint and Seclusion and De-Escalation Training. To
respond to this requirement BPS has created an
asynchronous online learning module consistent with 603
CMR 46.04(2). The training must be completed within the
month of September of every school year. For employees
hired after the beginning of the school year, the training
must be completed within the first month of their hire.
Each school leader shall determine a time and method to
provide all program staff with training regarding the
program's restraint prevention and behavior support policy
and requirements when restraint is used.
Training shall include information on the following:
(a) The role of the student, family, and staff in
preventing restraint;
(b) The program's restraint prevention and behavior
support policy and procedures, including use of
time-out as a behavior support strategy distinct from
seclusion;
(c) Interventions that may preclude the need for


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 18 of 35
restraint, including de-escalation of problematic
behaviors and other alternatives to restraint in
emergency circumstances;
(d) When behavior presents an emergency that
requires physical restraint, the types of permitted
physical restraints and related safety considerations,
including information regarding the increased risk of
injury to a student when any restraint is used, in
particular a restrain of extended duration;
(e) Administering physical restraint in accordance with
medical or psychological limitations, known or
suspected trauma history, and/or behavioral
intervention plans applicable to an individual student;
and
(f) Identification of program staff who have received
in-depth training pursuant to 603 CMR 46.04(3) in the
use of physical restraint
Below is the link to the training.
De-escalation training link
B. FOR ALL STAFF AUTHORIZED TO SERVE AS A
SCHOOL-WIDE RESOURCE ON THE PROPER
ADMINISTRATION OF PHYSICAL RESTRAINT
At the beginning of each school year, school leaders are
required to identify program staff who are authorized to
serve as a school-wide resource to assist in ensuring proper
administration of physical restraint. These individuals will


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 19 of 35
participate in in-depth training in the use of physical
restraint. Such training will include the content described in
603 CMR 46.04(4) and be competency-based and be at least
sixteen (16) hours in length with at least one refresher
training occurring annually thereafter. This training will be in
the Safety Care Program and provided by the Office of Social
Work Department or Special Education. Staff can register for
Safety Care training on Vector.
Only public education program personnel who have
received Safety Care training shall administer physical
restraint on students. Whenever possible, the administration
of restraint shall be witnessed by at least one adult who
does not participate in the restraint. However, the training
requirements shall not preclude a teacher, employee, or
agent of the public education program from using
reasonable force to protect students, other persons, or
themselves from assault or imminent, serious physical
harm. 603 CMR 46.05(1)
C. PROPER ADMINISTRATION OF RESTRAINT
Please review the Proper Administration of Restraint in Section III
above. This section gives additional details directly from the state
regulations.
1. Trained Personnel. Only public education program
personnel who have received training pursuant to 603
CMR 46.03(2) or (3) shall administer physical restraint
on students. Whenever possible, the administration of


Page 20:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 20 of 35
a restraint shall be witnessed by at least one adult who
does not participate in the restraint. The training
requirements shall not preclude a teacher, employee or
agent of a public education program from using
reasonable force to protect students, other persons or
themselves from assault or imminent, serious, physical
harm.
2. Use of Force. A person administering a physical
restraint shall use only the amount of force necessary
to protect the student or others from serious physical
injury or harm.
3. Safest Method. A person administering physical
restraint shall use the safest method available and
appropriate to the situation subject to the safety
requirements set forth in 603 CMR 46.05(5). Floor
restraints, including prone restraints otherwise
permitted under 603 CMR 46.03(1)(b), shall be
prohibited in Boston Public Schools.
4. Duration of Restraint. All physical restraint must be
terminated as soon as the student is no longer an
immediate danger to himself or others, or the student
indicates that he or she cannot breathe, or if the
student is observed to be in severe distress, such as
having difficulty breathing, or sustained or prolonged
crying or coughing.


Page 21:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 21 of 35
5. Safety Requirements. Additional requirements for the
use of physical restraint:
(a) No restraint shall be administered in such a way
that the student is prevented from breathing or
speaking. During the administration of a restraint,
a staff member shall continuously monitor the
physical status of the student, including skin
temperature and color, and respiration.
(b) Restraint shall be administered in such a way so
as to prevent or minimize physical harm. If, at any
time during a physical restraint, the student
expresses or demonstrates significant physical
distress including, but not limited to, difficulty
breathing, the student shall be released from the
restraint immediately, and school staff shall take
steps to seek medical assistance.
(c) If a student is restrained for a period longer than
20 minutes, program staff shall obtain the
approval of the principal. The approval shall be
based upon the student's continued agitation
during the restraint justifying the need for
continued restraint.
(d) Program staff shall review and consider any
known medical or psychological limitations,
known or suspected trauma history, and/or
behavioral intervention plans regarding the use of
physical restraint on an individual student.


Page 22:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 22 of 35
(e) After the release of a student from a restraint, the
public education program shall implement
follow-up procedures. These procedures shall
include reviewing the incident with the student to
address the behavior that precipitated the
restraint, reviewing the incident with the staff
person(s) who administered the restraint to
discuss whether proper restraint procedures were
followed, and consideration of whether any
follow-up is appropriate for students who
witnessed the incident.
D. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
Please review the Reporting Requirements in Section IV
above. This section gives additional details directly from the
state regulations.
1.
Circumstances under which a physical restraint must
be reported. Program staff shall report the use of any
physical restraint as specified in 603 CMR 46.06(2).
2. Informing the Principal. The program staff member
who administered the restraint shall verbally inform the
School Leader of the restraint as soon as possible, and
by written report no later than the next school working
day. The written report shall be provided to the School
Leaderfor review of the use of the restraint. If the
School Leaderhas administered the restraint, the
School Leadershall prepare the report and submit it to


Page 23:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 23 of 35
an individual or team designated by the
superintendent or board of trustees for review. The
School Leadershall maintain an on-going record of all
reported instances of physical restraint, which shall be
made available for review by the Department or the
student's parent/guardian, upon request.
3. Informing Parents/Guardians. The School Leadershall
make reasonable efforts to verbally inform the
student's parent/guardian of the restraint within 24
hours of the event, and shall notify the parent/guardian
by written report sent either within three school
working days of the restraint to an email address
provided by the parent/guardian for communications
about the student, or by regular mail postmarked no
later than three school working days of the restraint. If
the program customarily provides a parent/guardian of
a student with report cards and other necessary
school-related information in a language other than
English, the written restraint report shall be provided to
the parent/guardian in that language. The School
Leader shall provide the student and the
parent/guardian an opportunity to comment orally and
in writing on the use of the restraint and on
information in the written report.
4. Contents of Report. The written report required by 603
CMR 46.06(2) and (3) shall include: (a) The name of the
student; the names and job titles of the staff who
administered the restraint, and observers, if any; the
date of the restraint; the time the restraint began and


Page 24:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 24 of 35
ended; the name of the School Leader or designee who
was verbally informed following the restraint; and, as
applicable, the name of the School Leader or designee
who approved continuation of a restraint beyond 20
minutes pursuant to 603 CMR 46.05(5)(c). (b) A
description of the activity in which the restrained
student and other students and staff in the same room
or vicinity were engaged immediately preceding the
use of physical restraint; the behavior that prompted
the restraint; the efforts made to prevent escalation of
behavior, including the specific de-escalation strategies
used; alternatives to restraint that were attempted; and
the justification for initiating physical restraint. (c) A
description of the administration of the restraint
including the holds used and reasons such holds were
necessary; the student's behavior and reactions during
the restraint; how the restraint ended; and
documentation of injury to the student and/or staff, if
any, during the restraint and any medical care
provided. (d) Information regarding any further
action(s) that the school has taken or may take,
including any consequences that may be imposed on
the student. (e) Information regarding opportunities for
the student's parent/guardian to discuss with school
officials the administration of the restraint, any
consequences that may be imposed on the student,
and any other related matter.
5. Individual Student Review. The School Leader shall
conduct a weekly review of restraint data to identify


Page 25:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 25 of 35
students who have been restrained multiple times
during the week. If such students are identified, the
School Leadershall convene one or more review teams
as the School Leader deems appropriate to assess each
student's progress and needs. The assessment shall
include at least the following: (a) review and discussion
of the written reports submitted in accordance with
603 CMR 46.06 and any comments provided by the
student and parent/guardian about such reports and
the use of the restraints; (b) an analysis of the
circumstances leading up to each restraint, including
factors such as time of day, day of the week,
antecedent events, and individuals involved; (c)
consideration of factors that may have contributed to
escalation of behaviors, consideration of alternatives to
restraint, including de-escalation techniques and
possible interventions, and such other strategies and
decisions as appropriate, with the goal of reducing or
eliminating the use of restraint in the future; (d) an
agreement on a written plan of action by the
program.If the School Leader directly participated in
the restraint, a duly qualified individual designated by
the superintendent or board of trustees shall lead the
review team's discussion. The School Leader shall
ensure that a record of each individual student review
is maintained and made available for review by the
Department or the parent/guardian, upon request.
6. Administrative Review. The School Leader shall
conduct a monthly review of school-wide restraint data.


Page 26:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 26 of 35
This review shall consider patterns of use of restraints
by similarities in the time of day, day of the week, or
individuals involved; the number and duration of
physical restraints school-wide and for individual
students; the duration of restraints; and the number
and type of injuries, if any, resulting from the use of
restraint. The School Leader shall determine whether it
is necessary or appropriate to modify the school's
restraint prevention and management policy, conduct
additional staff training on restraint reduction or
prevention strategies, such as training on positive
behavioral interventions and supports, or take such
other action as necessary or appropriate to reduce or
eliminate restraints.
7. Report All Restraint-related Injuries to the Department.
When a physical restraint has resulted in an injury to a
student or program staff member, the program shall
send a copy of the written report required by 603 CMR
46.06(4) to the Department postmarked no later than
three school working days of the administration of the
restraint. The program shall also send the Department
a copy of the record of physical restraints maintained
by the School Leader pursuant to 603 CMR 46.06(2) for
the 30-day period prior to the date of the reported
restraint.
8. Report All Physical Restraints to the Department. Every
program shall collect and annually report data to the
Department regarding the use of physical restraints.


Page 27:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 27 of 35
Such data shall be reported in a manner and form
directed by the Department.
VI. COMPLAINT PROCEDURE
A. INFORMAL COMPLAINTS
Parents/guardians or students will notify the school leader or
designee of any concerns regarding restraint practices and
procedures. If a designee receives the complaint or a
concern, that designee shall notify the school leader within
the school day. The school leader shall attempt, within their
authority, to work with the parent/guardian to resolve the
complaint fairly and expeditiously. If the parent/guardian is
not satisfied with the resolution or does not choose an
informal resolution, then the parent/guardian may proceed
with the formal complaint process.
B. FORMAL COMPLAINTS
A complaint may be submitted to the Regional School
Superintendent regarding any restraint.
A complaint may be submitted to the Problem Resolution
System at the Massachusetts Department of Elementary
and Secondary Education at
https://www.doe.mass.edu/prs/intake/default.html.
For more information or questions on:


Page 28:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 28 of 35
Topic
Department &
Contact
Email
General Restraint
Policy, DESE
Requirements and
Documentation
Office of Specialized
Services
Kay Seale, Chief of
Specialized Services
Christine Trevisone,
Senior Advisor of
Specialized Services
kseale@bostonpublicscho
ols.org
ctrevisone@bostonpublics
chools.org
Safety-Care
(De-Escalation and
Physical Restraint
Training) – ABA
Strand
Office of Specialized
Services
Zachary Houston,
Assistant Director ABA
zhouston@bostonpublicsc
hools.org
Safety-Care
(De-Escalation and
Physical Restraint
Training) – non-ABA
schools
Office of Student
Support
Jenna Parafinczuk,
Director of Social Work
jparafinczuk@bostonpubli
cschools.org


Page 29:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 29 of 35
De-Escalation
Training
Office of Behavioral
Health
Andria Amador, Senior
Director of Behavioral
Health Services
aamador@bostonpublicsc
hools.org
Reporting
Schools Department
Drew Echelson, Chief
of Schools and
Accountability, or
Operational Leader for
Region
dechelson@bostonpublics
chools.org
●
Region 1: Jeichael
Henderson:
jhenderson@bostonp
ublicschools.org
●
Region 2: Courtney
Kinney:
cmaginnis@bostonp
ublicschools.org
●
Region 3: Michelle
Jordan:
mjordan2@bostonpu
blicschools.org
●
Region 4: Naima
Abdal-Khallaq:


Page 30:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 30 of 35
nabdalkhallaq@bosto
npublicschools.org
●
Region 5: Kristen
Weeks:
kweeks@bostonpubli
cschools.org
●
Region 6: Monique
Carter:
mcarter3@bostonpu
blicschools.org
●
Region 7: Nelson
Miranda:
nmiranda@bostonpu
blicschools.org
●
Region 8: Zach Solis:
zsolis@bostonpublics
chools.org
●
Region 9: Rui Gomes:
rgomes2@bostonpub
licschools.org
Mary Skipper, Superintendent


Page 31:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 31 of 35
ATTACHMENT A: QUICK REFERENCE DO’S AND DON’TS
FOR CRISIS INTERVENTION IN BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS
In Massachusetts, the use of physical restraint in public schools is
highly regulated, and it should only be employed as a last resort
to ensure the safety of students and staff. It is essential for teachers
and school staff to follow specific guidelines and best practices
when using physical restraint. Here's a list of Do's and Don'ts for
staff using physical restraint in public schools in Boston:
Do's:
●Use the Least Restrictive Method: Use the least restrictive
means of intervention. Alternatives to restraint, including but
not limited to verbal or other de-escalation techniques,
should be attempted before resorting to physical restraint.
●Safety First: Physical restraint should only be used when
there is a threat of assault or imminent serious physical harm.
It should never be used as a form of punishment or discipline.
●Training: Teachers and staff should receive proper training in
safe and effective restraint techniques, including annual
refresher training.
●Documentation: Document the incident thoroughly,
including the reason for restraint, the duration, and any
injuries sustained. This documentation should be completed
as soon as possible after the incident. The documentation
should contain the facts of the incident and restraint rather
than conclusions.


Page 32:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 32 of 35
●Documentation of Time-Outs: Staff should document in
Aspen the antecedent behavior and the time, date, duration
and location of any time-out used as a behavioral support
strategy. The school leader must give approval for any
time-out to continue more than 30 minutes based on the
individual student's continuing agitation.
●Communication: Maintain open and effective
communication with other staff members during a restraint
to ensure a coordinated and safe response.In the rare event
that a student is in crisis for more than 20 minutes,
restraints over 20 minutes must have approval from the
school leader. The school leader must document that
approval was granted for any restraint over 20 minutes.
●Notify Parents/Guardians: The principal or director of the
program notifies the parent/guardian, verbally as soon as
possible (within 24 hours), and by written report within 3
school working days by providing a copy of the physical
restraint report submitted to DESE.
●Monitoring: Continuously monitor the student's physical and
emotional well-being during the restraint. All physical
restraint must be terminated as soon as the student is no
longer an immediate danger to themself or others, or the
student indicates that they cannot breathe, or if the student
is observed to be in severe distress, such as having difficulty
breathing, or sustained or prolonged crying or coughing.


Page 33:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 33 of 35
●Legal Compliance: Be aware of and follow all relevant laws,
regulations, and school policies regarding the use of physical
restraint in schools.
●Seek Medical Attention: If there are any injuries or signs of
distress during the restraint, seek immediate medical
attention for the student or impacted individual.
●School Nurse Assessment: Whenever possible, the school
nurse should assess the student’s physical condition
following a restraint.
Do nots:
●DON’T Implement Unnecessary Restraint: Do not use
physical restraint unless there is a threat of assault or an
imminent serious physical harm. It should not be used for
minor infractions or as a convenience for staff.
●DON’T Seclude: Always maintain visibility and ensure
continued communication with the student. Also ensure the
presence of another staff member if possible. Under no
circumstances may a student be left alone in a room or area
from which the student is physically prevented from leaving.
Doors cannot be locked during any time-out.
●DON’T Use Protracted Restraint: Do not continue the
restraint once the student is no longer an immediate danger
to themself or others, or if the student indicates they cannot
breathe or is observed to be in severe distress.


Page 34:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 34 of 35
●DON’T Restrain the Head or Neck: Do not use any form of
restraint that puts pressure on a student's head, neck, or
throat, as it can be dangerous and potentially lethal.
●DON’T Use Untrained Staff: Do not allow untrained or
unauthorized staff to engage in physical restraint. Only
trained personnel should be involved in the process.
●DON’T Use Mechanical Restraints: Do not use mechanical
restraints, such as handcuffs, on students in public schools.
●DON’T Use Restraints for Revenge or Punishment: Do not
use physical restraint as a means of revenge, discipline, or
punishment. Restraint should always be a last resort to
protect the safety of all involved.
●DON’T Fail to Report: Do not neglect to report the use of
physical restraint to school administration, parents/guardians,
and relevant authorities as required by law and school policy.
Reports should be carefully written to record the facts of the
incident and restraint.
Remember that the use of physical restraint in public schools is
a sensitive and potentially risky action that should only be used
when all other means of ensuring safety have been exhausted.
Compliance with Massachusetts laws and regulations is
essential to protect the well-being and rights of all students
involved.


Page 35:
Superintendent’s Circular SUP-19
Page 35 of 35
ATTACHMENT B: NOTIFICATION PROCESS


