Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 
 NUMBER: 
ATH-02 
Version 01 
 
 
 
ATHLETIC ELIGIBILITY 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
ASPEN/ ELIGIBILITY MANAGEMENT 
ASPEN will be used to manage the students who are interested 
and ultimately participate in athletics each season.  The students 
and sports they are participating in should be accurate in ASPEN 
at the start of each season.  Key personnel (athletic coordinator, 
nurse, school admin) at the school level will have the ability to see 
the seasonal list of participating students and the current 
eligibility status.  Athletic coordinators, athletic trainers, school 
nurses, and coaches should communicate regularly to ensure 
that ASPEN accurately reflects who is participating on each team. 
The ASPEN sign-up period will open 8 weeks prior to the start of 
the season. The sign-up period in ASPEN will close 14 days after 
the start of the season. Athletes who start within the 14-day 
window must have a minimum of 5 days of practice prior to 
being allowed to participate in a game competition. Using the 
labels provided, each student in ASPEN should be identified as 
follows: 
Aspen Athletic Eligibility Status Definitions 
• INTEREST: defined as “Student identifies interest” — 
completes sign-up in ASPEN 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 2 of 12 
 
 
 
• ACTIVE:  defined as “Waiting on student”; i.e., turn in ALL 
required documentation known as the BPS Athletic 
Participation Forms, copy of a valid 13-month physical exam 
to the athletic trainer (or school nurse if athletic trainer not 
available), and tryout status 
• ACTION REQUIRED: defined as “Call to action”; 
School/Athletic Department submit MIAA waivers/forms 
where applicable 
• INELIGIBLE: defined as “Does not meet baseline eligibility 
requirements”; i.e., valid 13-month physical exam on file as 
documented in ASPEN, does not meet academic 
enrollment, attendance, or GPA requirements 
• PENDING: defined as “Awaiting decision from a higher 
authority”; i.e., MIAA waiver/approval, BPS Athletic 
Department, school principal/head of school or designee to 
review student academic eligibility 
• ELIGIBLE: defined as “Meets ALL eligibility requirements” for 
participation and has MIAA approvals on record with the 
BPS Athletic Department 
• INACTIVE: defined as a “no show,” “not participating,” or “did 
not make the team after tryouts.” 
 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
Athletic Coordinator 
Will serve as the athletics liaison and primary contact at the 
school for the Athletics Department and coaches to support 
athletics.  The athletic coordinator will be responsible for student-
athlete eligibility in collaboration with coaches, athletic trainers, 
school nurses, and school leadership.   


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 3 of 12 
 
 
 
Head Coach and Assistant Coaches 
Must be knowledgeable of the MIAA eligibility rules and 
regulations.  As interest lists and teams are being organized, 
coaches must communicate any eligibility concerns to their 
athletic coordinator so they are resolved prior to the start of the 
season and practice. 
Athletic Department Staff 
Will support schools through the eligibility/waiver process and 
serve as a liaison between the schools and the MIAA.  Athletics 
Department staff will schedule meetings prior to the start of each 
season with athletic coordinators, athletic trainers, and school 
nurses (if necessary/indicated) and support staff to review 
student-athlete eligibility.  Athletic department staff will maintain 
Aspen functionality and advise/teach athletic training staff 
necessary operations of the Aspen system for their needs 
Athletic Trainers 
Athletic trainers are responsible for the primary review of athletic 
physicals and determining the date(s) of valid pre-participation 
physical examination (PPE) and athlete eligibility based on 
having an up-to-date PPE on file.  Athletic trainers will route all 
PPE obtained from student-athletes to the school nurse to place 
in the student-athletes file.  Athletic trainers will provide coaches 
with a list of all athletes who have a valid, up-to-date PPE and are 
deemed eligible to play.   
 
Head of School/Principal 
Must be aware of and officially sign off on eligibility and rosters 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 4 of 12 
 
 
 
for teams each season.  When needed, school leaders must 
support and sign off on any MIAA or BPS eligibility waiver 
requests.  New heads of school are required to attend an MIAA 
rules workshop. 
SUMMARY OF HIGH SCHOOL INTERSCHOLASTIC ELIGIBILITY 
• 1.67 or higher GPA (schools may choose to have a higher 
GPA for athletic participation) 
• Must pass four (4) core classes 
• School attendance rate of 90% or higher (aligned with 
current BPS Attendance Policy) 
• A physical examination completed within the last 13 months 
stating that the student-athlete is or is not cleared for 
athletics that does not expire before the end of the season, 
with sports clearance from the r athletic trainer and/or 
school nurse 
• Students who turn 19 before September 1 of the current 
academic year are ineligible unless an age waiver is granted 
by the MIAA. 
SUMMARY OF MIDDLE-LEVEL ELIGIBILITY 
• 2.0 or higher GPA (schools may choose to have a higher GPA 
for athletic participation) 
• School attendance rate of 90% or higher  (aligned with 
current BPS Attendance Policy) 
• A physical examination completed within the last 13 months 
stating that the student-athlete is or is cleared for athletics 
that does not expire before the end of the season, with 
verification from the school nurse or athletic trainer and/or 
school nurse 
• Students who turn 15 before September 1 of the current 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 5 of 12 
 
 
 
academic year are ineligible to compete. 
• Yearly signed parental consent forms (transferable season to 
season) 
DETAILED OVERVIEW OF HIGH SCHOOL INTERSCHOLASTIC/ 
MIAA ATHLETICS 
 
Season 
Start Date 
Fall Sports 
3rd Friday in August (Football Aug 18) 
Winter Sports 
1st Monday after Thanksgiving (November 27) 
Spring Sports 
Third Monday of March (March 18, 2024) 
 
Participating student-athletes must meet the following criteria 
for eligibility each season.   
 
1) Age (Rule #60) 
a) A student shall be under 19 years of age but may 
compete during the remainder of the school year, 
provided that their birthday occurs on or after 
September 1 of that year. 
 
2) Transfer Students (Rule #57) 
a) A student who transfers from any school to an MIAA 
member HS is ineligible to participate in any 
interscholastic athletic contest at any level for a period 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 6 of 12 
 
 
 
of one year in all sports in which that student 
participated at the varsity level or its equivalent during 
the one-year period immediately preceding the 
transfer. 
i) 
Note: MIAA Form 200 may be executed between 
the receiving and sending school principals of 
MIAA member schools only. 
ii) 
All Form 200s must be submitted to the Athletics 
Department and MIAA Office for their records. 
b) Reason for Transfer 
i) 
Exemption to the transfer rule: When a student’s 
school transfer is necessitated (i.e., required) by a 
change of residence of their parent(s) to the area 
served by the school to which they transfer.  
ii) 
This exception does not apply to a change in 
custody, guardianship, or to a student’s change in 
residence from one parent to another, nor does it 
apply when the student could continue to attend 
the former school. 
3) Date entered school (MIAA Rule #51) 
a) Student-athletes must be enrolled in the school at the 
start of the season to be eligible to participate in 
athletics. 
b) This can be appealed with an MIAA waiver. 
4) Student Eligibility: Membership in School (MIAA Rule #55) 
a) A student shall have been a member of the MIAA 
member secondary school for a minimum of two 
months (exclusive of the Summer vacation).  


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 7 of 12 
 
 
 
5) Years of Eligibility 
a) When a student enters 9th grade, they are eligible for 
only four years. 
b) A student shall be eligible for interscholastic 
competition for no more than 12 consecutive athletic 
seasons after first entering grade 9. 
c) A waiver can be requested for an additional year of 
eligibility if there is an extenuating circumstance 
involved. 
6) Grade Point Average (GPA) and Transcripts (MIAA Rule #58) 
a) BPS requires that all students must have a cumulative 
GPA of 1.67 (or higher) to be eligible to participate in 
interscholastic athletics.   
b) During the last marking period preceding the contest 
(e.g., second-quarter marks and not semester grades 
determine third quarter eligibility), a passing grade in 
the equivalent of four major subjects 
c) To satisfy this requirement, a student must have 
passed sufficient courses for that marking period 
which carry Carnegie Units totaling the equivalent of 
four traditional 1-year major English courses. 
d) Full-Time Student:  A student cannot at any time 
represent a school unless that student is taking 
courses that would provide Carnegie Units equivalent 
to four traditional 1-year major English courses. 
e) To be eligible for the Fall marking period, students are 
required to have passed for the previous academic year 
the equivalent of four traditional 1-year major English 
courses. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 8 of 12 
 
 
 
i) 
Incomplete grades may not be counted toward 
eligibility until they are made up following school 
policy 
ii) 
A student who repeats work in which they have 
once received credit cannot count that subject a 
second time for eligibility. 
iii) 
A student cannot count for eligibility for any 
subject taken during the summer vacation unless 
that subject has been pursued and failed during 
the preceding academic year. 
 
7) Boston Public Schools Athletic Programs Consent for 
Participation Forms: 
a) BPS Athletic Programs Consent for Participation Forms 
must be completed and on file prior to any student-
athlete being allowed to participate or play for any BPS 
Athletic Team 
b) All BPS Athletic Programs Consent for Participation 
Forms will be sent to the parent/guardian of the 
student-athlete after completion of ASPEN registration. 
These forms will be distributed via DocuSign and will 
be distributed to ATC for review with the school 
athletic coordinator. These forms only need to be 
completed once per school year. The BPS Athletic 
Programs Consent for Participation Forms will consist 
of the following required forms: 
i) 
Parent/Guardian Consent Form 
ii) 
Acknowledgment of MIAA: 
(1) MIAA Rule 57: Student Eligibility: Transfer 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 9 of 12 
 
 
 
Students 
(2) MIAA Rule 59: Student Eligibility: Time 
Allowed for participation post 9th grade 
enrollment 
(3) MIAA Diversity Equity and Inclusion Pledge 
(new Nov 2022) 
iii) 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts - Chapter 269 
Section 17: Anti-Hazing Law 
iv) 
Hold Harmless Agreement 
v) 
Concussion Awareness 
vi) 
Upload - current physical examination for review 
by ATC 
vii) 
Media Appearances 
viii) 
DPH Head Injury Form 
ix) 
MGB Athletic Training Services Agreement 
 
8) Physical Exam (MIAA Rule #56)  
a) Participating students must have a valid physical or 
pre-participation examination (PPE) completed within 
the last 13 months.  
b) Physicals or PPE forms must have a statement that 
clears the student for athletic/sports 
c) Physicals or PPE must be completed and on file with 
BPS Athletics in Aspen prior to any student-athlete 
being allowed to practice or play for any BPS Athletic 
Team. 
d) Physicals or PPEs must be valid and on file for the 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 10 of 12 
 
 
 
entire athletic seasons 
e) Physicals or PPEs must include the date of the 
examination, physician's signature (electronic or 
actual), and wording that states that the student-
athlete is cleared for athletics or sports competition 
 
9) Enrollment/ Attendance 
a) Attendance for the term prior to the season must be 
90% or higher 
b) Students are ineligible to practice or compete if they 
are not in school for more than half of the school day. 
c) For a student to practice with or to represent a MIAA 
member school in an athletic competition, the student 
must be duly enrolled in that school (#51). Also, a 
student shall have been a member of the MIAA 
member secondary school for a minimum of two 
months (exclusive of the Summer vacation) and have 
been issued a report card preceding the contest unless 
entering from an elementary or junior high school at 
the start of the school year or transfers in from another 
school. (MIAA Rule #55.1) 
 
10) 
MIAA Waiver Request Process 
a) All “Form 200s” must be sent to the MIAA office so that 
all transfers are on file. 
b) Student Waiver of Athletic Eligibility waivers must 
include the following: 
i) 
A letter of support from the Principal/AD/School 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 11 of 12 
 
 
 
Administrator addressing the four standards of 
rule 87.5. 
ii) 
Transcripts from every year since first entering 
Grade 9 (including current grades) 
iii) 
Current school year attendance records 
iv) 
Comprehensive athletic resume (now included in 
application) 
v) 
League or District Advisory Vote 
vi) 
Form 200 (if applicable) 
c) The third standard, which must be addressed during a 
waiver application, was changed to “address how this 
waiver will impact the home school student body.” The 
new language captures the overall impact the waiver 
will have on the home school student body. 
d) A new section was added to Rule 87 titled 
“Accountability.” This details the process in the event 
inaccurate or incomplete information is presented 
during the waiver process. 
 
11) 
MIAA Appeals Process  
a) As of Fall 2021, there is only one level of appeal. The 
appeal hearing board will consist of members from 
both the MIAC and ERB. Their decision is final. 
b) The deadlines to submit waivers are as follows: 
i) 
Fall - September 21, 2023 
ii) 
Winter – December 14, 2023 
iii) 
Spring – March 31, 2024 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-02 
Page 12 of 12 
 
 
 
c) Waivers can be submitted after this date, but there will 
be no appeal hearings granted. 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Director, Athletics 
Department: 
Athletics Department  
Mailing 
Address: 
White Stadium 
P.O. Box 302205, Jamaica Plain, MA 02130 
Phone: 
617-635-8143 
Fax: 
617-635-8147 
Email: 
bpsathletictrainer@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


