Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
ATH-01 
Version 01 
 
PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT OF SPORTS-RELATED 
HEAD INJURIES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
BACKGROUND 
A concussion is a type of traumatic brain injury caused by a 
bump, blow, or jolt to the head that can affect brain functioning. 
Concussions can also occur from a blow to the body that causes 
the head to move rapidly back and forth. Even a mild bump or 
blow to the head can be serious.  
Concussions can occur in any sport or recreational activity. 
Children who return to play while still experiencing symptoms of 
a concussion are more likely to have another concussion or other 
lasting effects and symptoms. This circular outlines 
responsibilities of all who are involved in athletic participation. It 
includes the following components: 
● Pre-participation examination, including a history of 
previous concussions. 
● Protocols for assessing and managing a child who has a 
concussion on the field. 
● Protocols for returning a child who has had a concussion to 
full participation. 
● Academic assessment and accommodation for a child with 
continued symptoms that interfere with cognitive function 
and academic progress. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-01 
Page 2 of 7 
● Prevention of head injuries and health promotion activities 
that contribute to safe sports participation. 
HEADS OF SCHOOL AND PRINCIPALS SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE 
FOR: 
● Support and enforce the utilization of appropriate protocols, 
required documentation, training, and reporting outlined in 
these procedures. 
● Supervising and reviewing that all documentation is in 
place. 
○ All active coaches must complete the annual 
concussion certification required by the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
COACHES, CERTIFIED ATHLETIC TRAINERS, ATHLETIC 
COORDINATORS, SCHOOL NURSES, AND VOLUNTEERS (EMS, 
SPORTS PHYSICIANS) SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR:  
● Completing the annual educational training on 
identification and management of head trauma. 
● Ensuring and documenting that all students/families have 
submitted: 
○ Updated physical examinations consistent with 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and Massachusetts 
Interscholastic Athletic Association (MIAA) sports 
participation guidelines. 
○ Consents for: participation in athletics, emergency on-
field care, non-emergent injury or illness evaluation 
and associated follow up treatment related to athletics, 
documentation, travel, and medication. 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-01 
Page 3 of 7 
○ Completed department pre-participation forms (BPS 
Sports Medical Questionnaire) before participating in 
practice or extracurricular athletic activities. 
○ Commonwealth of Massachusetts head injury form. 
○ An indication that the family has reviewed educational 
materials about concussion. 
● Ensuring that the medical history questionnaire and pre-
participation sports physical form(s) are delivered to the 
school nurse and certified athletic trainer (ATC) in a time 
frame consistent with the sport. The school nurse and 
athletic trainer will discuss any student with a concussion 
history (as indicated by the athlete's primary care physician, 
pre-participation sports physical, or parent history) with 
their coach.  All athletes must be cleared by the school 
nurse and athletic trainer in order to play. 
● Teaching techniques aimed at minimizing sports-related 
head injury: 
○ Discouraging and prohibiting student athletes from 
engaging in any unreasonably dangerous athletic 
technique that endangers the health or safety of a 
student, including using a helmet or any other sports 
equipment as a weapon. 
○ Identifying students with head injuries or suspected 
concussions that occur in play or practice and 
removing them from play, using either:  
■ Coach/volunteer recognition of potential head 
injury 
■ Sideline assessment of concussion evaluation for 
MDs and ATCs.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-01 
Page 4 of 7 
● The results of the evaluation or screening tool must be 
available to the school nurse and parent/guardian, who will 
forward it to the PCP or other designated physician. 
● The coach, athletic trainer, or physician who observed and 
evaluated the concussion shall complete the DPH 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Report of Head Injury 
During Sports Season form and the Department Report of 
Head Injury form and transmit it to the athletic director, the 
parent/guardian, the school nurse, and the athletic trainer. 
● Communicating promptly with the parent/guardian of any 
student removed from play and providing them with 
documentation to bring to the student athlete’s PCP or 
other designated physician.  This documentation must 
include the DPT Commonwealth of Massachusetts Post 
Sports-Related Head injury Medical Clearance and 
Authorization form. This form must be completed by the 
physician and returned to the school nurse and athletic 
trainer. This form will be reviewed by the school nurse or 
athletic trainer and is required before the student athlete is 
allowed to begin a Return to Play protocol. 
● No student can return to play without clearance by the 
school nurse or athletic trainer in consultation with a 
physician per 105 CMR 201.   
● All student athletes who have sustained a concussive event 
must complete a graduated Return to Play protocol unless 
otherwise stipulated by the treating physician, assuring that 
all documentation is in place by conducting an annual 
compliance audit. This includes documentation that all 
students have: 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-01 
Page 5 of 7 
○ pre-participation PEs, consent forms, and 
parent/athlete sign off that concussion information has 
been reviewed. 
○ list of all students with concussion  
○ documentation of follow up for each student with 
concussion; documentation that athlete is cleared to 
play. 
THE SCHOOL NURSE AND ATHLETIC TRAINER WILL BE 
RESPONSIBLE FOR: 
● Completing the required annual educational training on 
concussion: 
○ School nurses will complete the Concussion 
Management in Massachusetts Schools course 
provided by Boston University School Health Institute 
annually. 
● Reviewing any questions raised by the athletic director 
and/or coaches, reviewing all medical questionnaires and 
physical exams.     
● Athletic trainer: Following up with parents/guardians as 
needed prior to the student's participation in extracurricular 
athletic activities. 
● School nurse: Following up with parents/guardians as 
needed prior to the student's participation in classroom 
activities. 
● Maintaining documentation of the medical questionnaire 
and physical in SNAP (the electronic medical record). 
● Maintaining documentation of the head injury assessments 
in the student's health record in the electronic medical 
record. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-01 
Page 6 of 7 
● Ensuring that any student who has experienced a 
concussion or head injury, during sports activities or 
otherwise, provides documentation of medical care and 
proper clearance to return to sports activities using the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Post Concussion 
Clearance Form. 
● Participating in the graduated reentry planning meeting for 
students who have been diagnosed with a concussion to 
discuss any necessary accommodations or modifications 
with respect to academics, course requirements, homework, 
testing, scheduling, and other aspects of school activities 
consistent with a graduated reentry plan for return to full 
academic and extracurricular activities after a head injury 
and revising the health care plan as needed. 
● Presenting appropriate and relevant medical information to 
the service team, on a need-to-know basis maintaining 
student privacy. 
● Monitoring recuperating students with head injuries and 
collaborating with teachers and coaches to ensure that the 
graduated reentry plan for return to full academic and 
extracurricular activities. 
● Providing beginning of school year review of concussions as 
well as ongoing educational materials on head injury and 
concussion to teachers, staff, and students. 
 
 
PARENTS/STUDENTS SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR: 
● Ensuring that the child has:   
a. A valid up to date pre-participation physical 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular ATH-01 
Page 7 of 7 
b. A completed sports medical questionnaire 
c. Completed the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Pre-
Participation Head Injury and Concussion Reporting 
Form for Extracurricular Activities 
● Reviewing concussion materials, including signed 
documentation of the review on the athletic permission 
form. 
● Ensuring that the child with a concussion is evaluated by 
PCP or other appropriate physician even if there has already 
been emergent transport deemed necessary by EMS or AT 
evaluation. 
● Working with the school nurse, athletic trainer, and the 
service team to safely implement return to play guidelines. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Senior Director, Athletics 
Department: 
Athletics Department  
Mailing Address: 
White Stadium, P.O. Box 302205, Jamaica 
Plain, MA 02130 
Phone: 
617-635-8143 
Fax: 
617-635-8147 
Email: 
bpsathletictrainer@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


