Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
TRN-01 
Version 01 
 
 
SCHEDULE OF SCHOOL HOURS  
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
Attached is an alphabetical listing of opening and closing hours 
for each school for the school year. This listing includes an AM 
bus drop-off time for each school when staff must be available to 
accept students, an AM bell, a PM bell, and an early dismissal 
time and day of week. 
Please pay special attention to the AM and PM bell times for your 
school. No changes may be made to these schedules — including 
to early dismissals — without the written permission of the chief 
operating officer. All requests for changes to bell times for the 
subsequent school year must be made in writing to the chief 
operating officer before the end of October.  
Please note the following regarding any requested changes: 
● Any requested bell time changes must be for either 
7:30am, 8:30am, or 9:30am AM bell times in order to align 
with the District’s 3-tier bell schedule 
● No requested bell time changes for an 8:30am start can be 
accommodated at this time, as the transportation 
operation is at capacity during the 2nd tier. 
IMPORTANT NOTES ON TRANSPORTATION: 
● All BPS buses are scheduled to arrive at schools 15 minutes 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-01 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
before the scheduled AM bell time to give students time 
to settle in and have breakfast before instruction starts. 
Adequate staff assistance is needed to make sure buses 
are unloaded as they arrive, as efficiently and safely as 
possible, so that these buses can get to the next 
scheduled location on time. Buses are expected to depart 
the school for their next trip no more than 10 minutes after 
their arrival. In some cases, with agreement from the 
school, buses are scheduled to arrive more than 15 
minutes before the scheduled AM bell time 
● PM buses are scheduled to arrive at each schools’ PM bell 
time. Adequate staff assistance and the appropriate 
dismissal procedure are needed to make sure buses are 
loaded as they arrive. Buses are expected to depart 10 
minutes after the PM bell to get to their next scheduled 
location on time.  
● On the day before Thanksgiving and the last two days of 
school in June, all schools will dismiss pupils a uniform 
two (2) hours and thirty (30) minutes earlier than their full-
day PM bell time, unless operationally there is a need to 
modify dismissal.  The uniform two hour and thirty-minute 
early release will apply to all schools, regardless of any 
regularly scheduled early release or past practice. 
● Certain specialized programs/schools have hours that are 
subject to determination by the superintendent or 
designee.  
 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-01 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Executive Director of Transportation 
Department: 
Transportation 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9643  
Fax: 
617-635-9541 
Email: 
Operations-Department-Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
ATTACHMENT: 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS SCHEDULE OF SCHOOL HOURS
 


