Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
TRN-02 
Version 01 
 
 
 
STUDENT TRANSPORTATION SAFETY & DISCIPLINE 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
HEAD OF SCHOOL/PRINCIPAL EXPECTATIONS 
The school bus is considered an "extension of the classroom" in 
terms of expected student behavior. The school is responsible for 
working with students and parents/guardians to address 
behaviors of students and parents/guardians that take place on 
or are related to bus service that are not consistent with school 
and district policies. This policy reinforces the Standards of 
Behavior for Boston Public School students. The head of 
school/principal is responsible for implementing the Code of 
Conduct and Standards of Behavior as they apply to students and 
parents/guardians while utilizing school transportation and the 
MBTA. The head of school/principal will also communicate 
student/parent/guardian obligations at the start of the school 
year via student presentations and notification to 
parents/guardians through School-Based Rules. Please note that 
the Code of Conduct includes procedures for the denial of 
transportation.  
The head of school/principal will apply all approved Boston Public 
Schools policies and procedures to matters of regular 
transportation service and field trips, athletics, and late bus runs. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
 
INCIDENT REPORTING AND RESPONSE 
The head of school/principal will report all incidents, maintain all 
records, and take appropriate action as prescribed in applicable 
Superintendent's Circulars, including but not limited to any state 
or federal reporting (e.g., mandated reporting to DCF or the SSDR 
report for DESE, etc.). In the event of a school transportation 
incident resulting in student injury, the school administrator will 
contact the parent(s)/guardian(s) and provide appropriate 
information in accordance with Superintendent's Circular FSE-05, 
Medical Emergency Management. The head of school/principal 
will maintain copies of all incident reports filed by drivers and 
utilize reports for remedial actions.  
BPS school buses are equipped with two cameras. One camera 
faces out from the bus forward to record oncoming traffic. The 
second camera is focused inward on the bus from the front of the 
bus. Cameras do not record sound. Only in emergency situations 
(e.g. active missing student investigation) may camera footage 
be accessed in real time and only by Department of 
Transportation personnel. When an incident is reported, 
depending on the nature of the incident, a review of video 
footage of the reported incident may be requested by a school, a 
parent/guardian, or a member of the district transportation team. 
In most situations, student conduct investigations will rely on 
incident reports from students and adults on board the bus, 
rather than camera footage. Any requests for bus footage must 
run through the BPS Transportation Department. Cameras have 
limited video storage capacity that typically store 7 (seven) to 10 
(ten) days of footage, depending on bus usage. Cameras are not 
actively monitored. Neither BPS DOT nor the bus vendor will use 
cameras for any purpose other than investigating specific 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
 
allegations. 
When incidents occur that are related to bus transportation, BPS 
DOT can work with schools on implementing solutions to 
support successful student transportation on BPS buses. Some 
strategies that have been effective in the past include but are not 
limited to school-led mediations with parents/guardians, 
students, bus drivers, bus monitors, and school staff; school-led in 
depth training for drivers and/or monitors; school assigned bus 
seating plans; addition of a bus attendant by the school to the 
bus. In very limited circumstances, requiring approval of the 
Director of BPS DOT, a student, driver, or monitor may be 
reassigned. Such reassignment will be a last resort only after 
other strategies have been exhausted. This helps ensure that 
students are fully supported in learning how to successfully 
navigate yellow bus transportation. 
RELATIONSHIPS WITH DRIVERS & MONITORS AND MANAGING 
BUS ARRIVALS AND DISMISSALS 
The head of school/principal or their designee is responsible for 
monitoring transportation service and the performance of school 
bus drivers and monitors. This includes daily one-on-one contact 
by school staff with a driver upon their arrival and departure from 
a school. Heads of school/principals are advised and encouraged 
to make all efforts to maintain a positive relationship with all 
drivers and bus monitors and to also endeavor to work 
constructively with all BPS and Transdev staff with whom they 
come in contact throughout the school year. 
School administrative staff are responsible for managing safe and 
efficient bus arrival and dismissal processes. All buses assigned to 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
 
a school are together scheduled to be fully loaded or unloaded 
within a ten-minute window. To be on time for all subsequent 
trips, in the morning all buses must be unloaded and depart the 
school by the school’s bell time. In the afternoon, all buses 
assigned to a school must load and depart the school by 10 
minutes after the bell time.  
When arriving at schools, buses may not allow students to unload 
until a member of the school staff is present to meet students. 
This ensures that a school staff member is present to take 
responsibility for students before students exit the bus. Schools 
are responsible for maintaining up-to-date bus rosters and 
ensuring students are placed on their assigned bus during bus 
dismissal. BPS Transportation Department operations support is 
available to review bus loading and unloading procedures upon 
request. 
Heads of school/principals are encouraged to make time 
available to meet with drivers who wish to confer with them on a 
voluntary basis throughout the school year for the purpose of 
maintaining their transportation safety/discipline program. 
Heads of school/principals may provide drivers with a seating 
plan for each bus, but they should work constructively with 
drivers and monitors in the implementation of such a plan. If a 
seating plan is put in place, students should be instructed to 
remain in their assigned seats throughout the trip. 
The head of school/principal or their designee should regularly 
interview students to make assessments of the quality of 
transportation service and are also asked to monitor ridership 
and notify BPS Transportation if any bus assignments are not 
being utilized. Schools can provide student opt out information in 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
 
our Support Portal. This link provides a walkthrough. We ask 
schools to utilize our Support Portal to ensure accountability 
within our team and support our effort to reduce follow-up times. 
The head of school/principal or their designee may occasionally 
ride school buses for first-hand observation of operations, but 
notification to the Transportation Department must be made in 
advance to ensure that buses are within capacity requirements 
for ridership.  
Monitors assigned through the special education process are 
essential members of a student’s support team. Schools are 
responsible for training bus monitors on IEP required student 
specific supports.  Monitors must be included in students’ 
support teams for training on an ongoing basis to be prepared to 
best meet the needs of our students who ride the bus and to help 
ensure students can succeed in the least restrictive environment. 
Schools may contact the BPS DOT Monitors Unit to arrange 
meetings with monitors throughout the school year.  
Please remember that bus drivers and bus monitors are 
important members of our school community. When they are at 
your school, per district policy, they are permitted to use 
restroom facilities. Bus drivers and bus monitors are expected to 
present identification to enter any building. Just like for all other 
members of our school and district staff, please ensure that these 
team members have access to bathroom facilities in your 
building as needed. 
SAFETY EDUCATION AND EVACUATION DRILLS 
The head of school/principal will support all safety education 
efforts relative to transportation and initiate programs within the 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
 
first week of the school year and throughout the school year. 
School bus evacuation drills are to be conducted in accordance 
with M.G.L., Chapter 90, Section 9B, which mandates school bus 
evacuation instruction and drills. Evidence of completed 
instruction and drills must be kept on file by the head of 
school/principal. BPS Transportation, Transdev Safety, and BPS 
Safety Services personnel will assist school administrators in 
conducting bus evacuation drills as required by M.G.L. Chapter 
90, section 9B. 
ROLE OF THE BPS TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT 
• The Transportation Department acts as the liaison between 
the bus company, school personnel, parents/guardians, BPS 
Safety Services, and Boston Police Department. 
• The Transportation Department monitors contractual 
compliance by vendors relative to the employment of 
drivers and driver conduct. 
• The Transportation Department records all complaints 
regarding driver behavior and forwards them to the 
company for remedial action by the bus company. The 
Director of Transportation may, in extreme circumstances, 
order suspension or reassignment of drivers subject to 
consultation with the bus vendor and the collective 
bargaining agreement between drivers and bus company. 
• The Transportation Department completes bus routing and 
planning to create efficient bus schedules that minimize 
ride time for students and optimize deployment of drivers, 
monitors, and buses. Where necessary, the Transportation 
Department will revise routes or pick-up points to reduce 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
 
potential safety problems. 
• The Transportation Department provides parents/guardians 
with advice relative to procedures to assist in the resolution 
of transportation issues. 
• The Transportation Department notifies the head of 
school/principal of any school bus accident, including a list 
of the students onboard the bus and any other relevant 
information. In the event an accident occurs after school 
hours, the Transportation Department will attempt to notify 
the Head of School/Principal at home. 
• In the event of a school transportation accident or incident 
resulting in student injury, BPS Transportation implements 
the following procedures: 
o Ensures Transdev Safety staff has properly followed 
procedures and notified police or emergency medical 
services as necessary. 
o Notifies the school building administrator, principal 
leader, assistant superintendent of operations, and 
operational leader, relaying all available information. 
Building administrators are then responsible for 
notifying parents/guardians. 
• If the building administrator or other school-based staff is 
not available, BPS Transportation Department staff will 
notify parents/guardians or emergency contact person. 
ROLE OF THE BUS COMPANY – TRANSDEV TRANSPORTATION 
The bus company will comply with all requirements contained in 
its contract with the School Committee, its collective bargaining 
agreements with its staff, and all Massachusetts laws and 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
 
regulations as they pertain to school bus safety and reporting. 
The bus company will adhere to the Incident Response & Report 
Process as outlined below: 
1. The Transdev Safety Desk will log all calls and deployment 
requests sent into the Safety Desk by drivers or safety staff, 
BPS Transportation, or others and will submit those along 
with any incident reports generated after an incident. 
2. In an emergency, Transdev Safety Desk will call BPS or EMS 
and deploy Transdev road safety supervisors to all serious 
incidents and accidents. Transdev Safety Desk will notify 
BPS Transportation staff immediately upon learning of any 
serious incident and will continue to supply timely details 
from the scene as they become available. In the event of a 
school transportation incident resulting in student injury 
after normal operating hours, Transdev Safety Desk staff and 
BPS Transportation Call Center staff will assist school 
administrators in the parent/guardian notification process. 
3. Transdev drivers will provide as much specific information 
as possible over the radio to Safety Desk and in their written 
reports, mainly the names and student numbers of involved 
students. Drivers should also fill out incident reports and 
give copies to school administrators and their branch 
supervisors daily. All incident reports are logged on a 
computer database at the bus company.  
4. Transdev safety staff and BPS Transportation work together 
to communicate with heads of school/principals and police 
where necessary to assist in the resolution of incidents. 
Heads of school/principals are required to contact 
parents/guardians and discipline students when necessary.  


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
 
The bus company will instruct drivers to meet with heads of 
school/principals after the "dry runs" of bus routes before the 
opening of school. Heads of school/principals should be prepared 
to discuss their student transportation safety/discipline program 
with drivers at that time and throughout the year. Drivers may 
also be made available to meet with the head of school/principal 
on an ongoing basis. Arrangements for meetings can be made by 
contacting the BPS Transportation Department.  
Transdev road safety supervisors and driver trainers will inspect 
the safety and accessibility of pick-up and drop-off locations 
throughout the city as requested. 
 
 
 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular TRN-02 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of Transportation 
Department: 
Transportation 
Mailing Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9643  
Fax: 
617-635-9541 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
OR 
Owner: 
Chief of Student Support 
Department: 
Student Support Office 
Mailing Address: 
213 Townsend Street, Dorchester, MA 02121 
Phone: 
617-635-8000 
Fax: 
617-635-8006 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


