Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
SHS-20  
Version 01 
 
ASTHMA IN SCHOOLS 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
POLICY STATEMENT 
The Boston Public Schools recognizes that a clear, concise policy 
on asthma management in school can impact academic 
achievement. All schools must have protocols and procedures for 
children with asthma and evaluate the implementation of these 
plans regularly. This document outlines the comprehensive and 
collaborative nature of managing a child’s asthma within a school 
setting. 
BACKGROUND ON ASTHMA 
Because asthma is one of the most common chronic childhood 
illnesses and a major cause of student absences, it is important 
for schools to adopt a comprehensive, coordinated approach to 
addressing asthma. 
While asthma affects people of all ages, races, genders, and 
segments of society, the burden is not equally shared across 
racial and ethnic groups. It is most often a disease of the young 
and of the poor. In 2020, 25.3 million Americans reported a 
diagnosis of asthma. Of those, 21 million were adults, and 4.2 
million were children.1 Nearly half of children (52.7%) and adults 
with asthma living below the poverty level reported an asthma 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-20 
Page 2 of 9 
 
attack in the past year2, which is an indication of poor asthma 
control. Children and people living below the poverty level are 
among the groups most likely to have asthma, and to suffer from 
severe asthma attacks, hospitalization, and even death. Asthma 
morbidity and mortality are disproportionately burdensome for 
African Americans and Hispanics, who are least likely to have 
access to health education and adequate healthcare.  
A comprehensive plan includes management and support 
systems, appropriate health and mental health services, 
educational programs for staff and students, appropriate and 
reasonable environmental remediation, and communication 
systems with home and child clinicians. 
These components need to be integrated with community efforts 
that include the medical and mental health fields, housing and 
community air quality improvements, and active engagement of 
families. 
This document links with the Medication Administration Policy 
and Management of Life-Threatening Allergic Reaction policies.  
PROTOCOL FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
Role of the Parent 
• At the time of registration, the parent/guardian should 
inform the Welcome Center staff of any health concerns of 
their child, including asthma. The Health Services 
Department remains available to support any student or 
parent/guardian wishing to discuss this information 
privately.  
• Complete emergency forms indicating that their child has 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-20 
Page 3 of 9 
 
asthma and include emergency numbers. 
• Provide the school nurse with a current Asthma Action Plan 
and emergency management plan from the student’s 
physician and/or pulmonologist. It is recommended that the 
parent/guardian meet with the school nurse in person to 
discuss their child’s plan. 
• Review with your child’s primary care provider/specialist and 
sign all asthma forms presented by the school nurse. These 
may include a combination of the following: 
o Permission for a school nurse to communicate with the 
family and the primary care provider/specialist 
o Authorization to dispense medication 
o Consent for child’s self-administration of asthma 
medicine (when developmentally appropriate) 
o The Parent/Guardian Asthma Questionnaire 
o The Asthma Action Plan 
• Provide the school with a pharmacy-labeled supply of 
medications (oral and inhalers), including nebulizer 
medications, masks, and tubing. Most health rooms have 
nebulizers but are not equipped with extra masks and 
tubing. 
• Participate in the Asthma Action Plan for their child with the 
child’s health practitioner and deliver the completed asthma 
action plan to the school nurse. 
• Provide a cell phone number or other emergency number/s 
• Assure that the pre-school and after-school staff has the 
appropriate information and training. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-20 
Page 4 of 9 
 
Role of the School Administrator 
• Support faculty, staff, and parents in implementing all 
aspects of the asthma management program, including 
self-management. 
• Support the development of a schoolwide policy, with input 
from the School Site Council, for management of the school 
environment, which includes, but is not limited to: 
o Maintaining an active Integrated Pest Management 
Program 
o Review of and action on annual school inspections 
o Use of green cleaners 
o Enforcement of the tobacco-free policy 
• Ensure there is a contingency plan for a substitute nurse, 
teacher, or food service personnel who is not familiar with 
the child. 
• Ensure that the classroom staff is informed about asthma 
prevention, management, and emergency response. 
• Support program development, especially in schools with 
higher than the state average of students diagnosed with 
asthma or with large numbers of absenteeism related to 
asthma. 
• Review environmental inspections and ensure that all work 
orders occur in a timely fashion. 
• Support the student support team, the school nurse, and 
the classroom teacher in identifying children with increased 
absenteeism in relation to asthma. 
• Inform the school nurse 4-6 weeks in advance of field trips 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-20 
Page 5 of 9 
 
to thoroughly support a student's participation in a field trip 
and ensure adequate planning time (e.g., staff training, 
preparation of medications) 
Role of the Student (where it is developmentally appropriate) 
• Sign off on self-administration plan guidelines. 
• Participate in self-management program(s) such as Open 
Airways or Kickn’ Asthma to help better identify triggers 
that may cause asthma symptoms and response. 
• Complete the “Student Breathing/Asthma Questionnaire.” 
Role of the School Nurse 
• Obtain and review the student’s current Asthma Action Plan 
(AAP) and other pertinent information from the student’s 
parents/guardians and health care providers, including 
medication administration permission form. 
• Obtain releases for nurse/health care provider 
communication and physician authorization for medication. 
• Administer medication per provider order, monitor asthma 
control, coordinate care, and maintain records. 
• Provide safe storage and easy access to prescribed 
medication when needed. 
• Promote and encourage independence and self-care 
consistent with the student’s ability, skill, maturity, and 
development as indicated in the AAP. After reviewing the 
AAP with the parents/guardians and student, implement, 
review, and update the plan throughout the school year as 
needed. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-20 
Page 6 of 9 
 
• Develop a plan for student management in the classroom, 
lunchroom, playground, and athletic field that provides 
routine and emergency care. 
• Complete with the student (where developmentally 
appropriate) the Student Breathing/Asthma questionnaire. 
• Ensure that all other staff members (including coaches) who 
have contact with children with asthma are familiar with 
their Asthma Action Plan on a need-to-know basis. Teachers 
should be contacted individually rather than with lists 
posted. 
• Provide a list of students with life-threatening allergies as a 
component to their asthma (if consent is given by parent) to 
all staff on a need-to-know basis; lists must be maintained in 
a confidential manner to protect students’ privacy. 
• Conduct in-service training and education for appropriate 
staff regarding asthma symptoms, risk reduction 
procedures, and emergency procedures. This information 
should be reviewed annually, preferably at the beginning of 
the school year.  
• Ensure that there is a contingency plan in place in all school-
related venues where substitutes are utilized. 
• Communicate with parents regularly to discuss issues 
relating to the plan. 
Role of the Teacher 
• Maintain a discrete list of all students in the classroom with 
asthma; lists must be maintained in a confidential manner 
to protect students’ privacy. 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-20 
Page 7 of 9 
 
• Participate in asthma awareness professional development 
opportunities, as needed. 
• Inform volunteers, student teachers, aides, specialists, and 
substitute teachers about the child's asthma needs on a 
need-to-know basis, while maintaining student 
confidentiality. 
• Provide the school nurse with an adequate warning (4-6 
weeks for field trips) about school-sponsored off-site 
activities. 
• Notify the school nurse of any concerns. 
Role of Off-site Staff  
• Maintain a list of all students with severe persistent asthma; 
lists must be maintained in a confidential manner to protect 
students’ privacy. 
• Coaches will be informed of any students on their teams 
who have asthma (through review in ASPEN/Sports 
Clearance form) and trained in asthma awareness and 
maximizing athletic performance. 
• Allow responsible students to self-medicate during practices 
and sports events; students must have a self-medication 
plan on file with the school nurse. 
       Role of the Coordinator of Special Education (COSE): 
• If a student is referred for consideration for a 504 
accommodation plan and/or special education, the COSE 
will process as appropriate; the parent/guardian, school 
nurse, and other school staff must be involved in the plan 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-20 
Page 8 of 9 
 
development and implementation. 
• If a student is eligible for a 504 accommodation plan (or is 
being evaluated for a 504 accommodation plan), the team 
will discuss eligibility for transportation. 
• If a student already has an IEP (or is being evaluated) and 
transportation may be necessary for the medical condition 
(but not necessarily the area of educational disability), the 
team shall consider transportation needs (team shall include 
school nurse). If special transportation is necessary, it can be 
added to the IEP. 
 
REFERENCES 
Managing Asthma: A Guide for Schools 
Asthma Self-Management Skills, American Lung Association 
CDC Strategies for Managing Asthma in Schools 
1CDC Most Recent National Asthma Data 
2American Lung Association Controlling Childhood Asthma 
and Reducing Emergencies Initiative 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-20 
Page 9 of 9 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent   


