Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SHS-26 
Version 01 
 
 
 
ADMINISTRATION OF NALOXONE 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
To recognize and respond to potential life-threatening opioid 
overdose as part of the MDPH opioid overdose prevention 
program, the Boston Public Schools will maintain a systemwide 
plan for addressing a potentially life-threatening opioid overdose 
reaction.  
Additionally:   
• This plan will be supplemented by any building-based 
medical emergency response plan.  
• The director of Health Services will have the responsibility 
for the development and management of the intranasal 
Naloxone administration program in the school setting in 
accordance with MDPH protocols.   
• The school physician will provide oversight to monitor the 
program and creation of the standing order for the district, 
to be renewed annually.   
• Training per MDPH protocols will be provided for all school 
nurse responders.  
Naloxone is the only Schedule IV controlled substance in 
Massachusetts that can be prescribed to someone other than the 
ultimate user. The Massachusetts Controlled Substances Act, 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-26 
Page 2 of 9 
 
 
 
M.G.L. c.94C,§19(b), authorizes naloxone to be prescribed or 
dispensed to a person for use on someone else. It is the policy of 
the Boston Public Schools that all schools shall provide and 
maintain naloxone on-site in each school facility.  To treat a case 
of suspected opioid overdose in a school setting, any school 
nurse may administer naloxone during an emergency to any 
student, staff, or visitor suspected of having an opioid-related 
drug overdose, whether or not there is a previous history of 
opioid abuse, per 105 CMR 210.000, The Administration of 
Prescription Medications in Public and Private Schools.  
Because naloxone is treated differently than any other 
prescription medication, and because any person can possess 
and administer naloxone, pursuant to the standing order, it is the 
policy of the Massachusetts Department of Public Health School 
Health Unit that individual possession and use of naloxone is not 
covered by 105 CMR 210.000. This means that pursuant to M.G.L. 
c.94c,§19(g) any staff member of the Boston Public Schools who, 
in good faith, attempts to render emergency care by 
administering naloxone to a person reasonably believed to be 
experiencing an opiate related overdose, shall not be liable from 
the attempt to render emergency care and may carry and 
administer naloxone on school property and school events, as 
permitted within M.G.L. c. 94C, §§ 19(d) and 34A9e). This immunity 
does not apply to acts or omissions constituting gross 
negligence. 
BACKGROUND  
Recognizing that fatal and non-fatal overdoses from opioids play 
an increasing role in the mortality and morbidity of 
Massachusetts residents, the Massachusetts Department of 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-26 
Page 3 of 9 
 
 
 
Public Health launched the Overdose Education and Naloxone 
Distribution (OEND) prevention program using intranasal 
Naloxone in an attempt to reverse this trend. Naloxone is an 
opioid antagonist which means it displaces the opioid from 
receptors in the brain. An overdose occurs because the opioid is 
on the same receptor site in the brain that is responsible for 
breathing. Rapid administration of naloxone may be lifesaving in 
patients with an overdose due to opioids. Naloxone usually acts 
dramatically, allowing slowed or absent breathing to resume. It is 
both safe and effective and has no potential for abuse. Naloxone 
has been used by paramedics in ambulances and by emergency 
room clinicians for decades.  
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS OF OPIOID OVERDOSE  
School nurses may administer naloxone to a patient (student, 
staff member or visitor) in the event of respiratory depression, 
unresponsiveness, or respiratory arrest, when an opioid overdose 
is suspected.  
The following are signs of an opioid overdose:   
• Blue skin tinge-usually lips and fingertips show first.   
• Body is very limp.   
• Face is very pale.   
• Pulse is slow, erratic, or not present.   
• Vomiting.   
• Choking sounds, gurgling, snoring/gasping noise.   
• Breathing is very slow, irregular or has stopped.  
• Unresponsive.  


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-26 
Page 4 of 9 
 
 
 
ROLE OF SCHOOL HEALTH SERVICES 
• Develops policy for administration of naloxone and presents 
to BPS School Committee for approval; reviews policy 
annually. 
• Provides annual education and training for school nurses by 
approved MDPH organizations. 
• Secures and distributes naloxone kits to each school/school 
nurse. 
• Determines proper disposal of used +/or expired naloxone.  
ROLE OF SCHOOL LEADER 
• Supports and facilitates access to school nurse training on 
administration of naloxone. 
• Supports substance abuse prevention education as part of a 
comprehensive health education program. 
• The school leader and staff should be alert to those 
symptoms in students which may indicate problems with 
substance abuse so that they may initiate assistance to 
students in need of early intervention. 
ROLE OF SCHOOL NURSE 
• Participates in a training program offered by Health 
Services. 
• Provides safe storage and easy access to naloxone. 
• Is alert to symptoms in students which may indicate 
problems with substance abuse in order to initiate 
assistance to students in need of early intervention.  


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-26 
Page 5 of 9 
 
 
 
• Refers the student to the Student Support Team if the 
student is struggling with substance use. 
• Administers naloxone following the procedure as listed 
below in the event of respiratory depression, 
unresponsiveness, or respiratory arrest, when an opioid 
overdose is suspected and activate EMS. 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Activate EMS via Medical Emergency Response Plan. The 
nurse or designee must call 911 in all potential overdose 
situations.  
2. Assessment:  ABC’s: Airway, Breathing, Circulation. When 
an individual is suspected of an opioid overdose, the nurse 
will conduct an initial assessment of the level of 
consciousness and respiratory status.  
a. For individuals with no pulse: initiate CPR per BLS 
guidelines.  
b. For individuals with a pulse but who are not breathing: 
establish an airway and perform rescue breathing 
using a face mask or shield. 
c. Check for: foreign body in airway, level of 
consciousness or unresponsiveness, very low 
respiratory rate or not breathing, no response to sternal 
rub, respiratory status, gasping for air while asleep or 
odd snoring pattern, pale or bluish skin, slow heart rate, 
low blood pressure. Pinpoint pupils and track marks 
may be present, although absence of these findings 
does not exclude opioid overdose.  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-26 
Page 6 of 9 
 
 
 
d. For individuals who have a pulse and are breathing: 
assess if there is depression of the respiratory status as 
evidenced by:   
i. a very low respiration rate.   
ii. interpretation of pulse oximetry measurement, if 
immediately available. 
e. Assess for decrease in level of consciousness as 
evidenced by:   
i. difficult to arouse (responds to physical stimuli 
but does not communicate or follow commands; 
may move spontaneously) or   
ii. unable to arouse (minimal or no response to 
noxious stimuli, does not communicate or follow 
commands). 
f. Nurse determines need for naloxone administration.  
3. Administration: Intranasal administration of naloxone  
a. Assess person for contraindications or precaution, per 
available information. 
b. How to use naloxone nasal spray:  
i. Follow manufacturer’s instructions for proper 
administration. 
ii. Step 1. Lay the person on their back to receive a 
dose of naloxone nasal spray.  
iii. Step 2. Remove naloxone nasal spray from the 
box. Peel back the tab with the circle to open the 
naloxone nasal spray. 
iv. Step 3. Hold the naloxone nasal spray with your 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-26 
Page 7 of 9 
 
 
 
thumb on the bottom of the red plunger and your 
first and middle fingers on either side of the 
nozzle.  
v. Step 4. Tilt the person’s head back and provide 
support under the neck with your hand. Gently 
insert the tip of the nozzle into one nostril until 
your fingers on either side of the nozzle are 
against the bottom of the person’s nose.  
vi. Step 5. Press the red plunger firmly to give the 
dose of naloxone nasal spray. 
vii. Step 6. Remove the naloxone nasal spray from the 
nostril after giving the dose.  
viii. If the person does not respond in 3 mins, repeat 
the steps and give the second dose of naloxone 
nasal spray in a box. 
ix. Monitor until EMS arrives.   
x. Place the victim in the recovery position and stay 
with the victim.  
4. Monitor the individual: Naloxone blocks the opioid from 
acting so it can cause withdrawal symptoms with opioid 
tolerance. 
a. Remain with the victim until emergency support 
arrives; The victim may breathe but not have full 
arousal OR They may require continued rescue 
breathing and support. 
Following the incident, debrief with the school team and health 
services. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-26 
Page 8 of 9 
 
 
 
Documentation:  
1. Record the encounter in SNAP. 
2. Complete an Incident report. 
3. Complete a “911” report. 
4. Include the individual’s presentation, route of 
administration of naloxone, and dose administered. Also 
include the individual’s response to the naloxone 
administration. 
Storage: Store at 59° to 86°, away from direct sunlight 
Disposal: Empty, administered naloxone nasal spray should 
be returned to the original packaging and disposed of in a 
waste receptacle. 
REFERENCES 
• BPS SHS-01 Drug and Alcohol Abuse – Update On 
Procedures 
• BPS SHS-08 Medication Administration 
• NASN Naloxone Toolkit for School Nurses 
• MDPH Bureau of Substance Addiction Services 
 
 
 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-26 
Page 9 of 9 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


