Page 1:
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
SHS-01 
Version 01 
 
DRUG AND ALCOHOL MISUSE AND HARM REDUCTION – 
UPDATE ON PROCEDURES 
 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version 
EDUCATION OF STUDENTS IN THE PREVENTION OF ALCOHOL, 
MARIJUANA, TOBACCO AND OTHER DRUG DEPENDENCY 
 
While substance misuse prevention and harm reduction should 
be a part of a comprehensive health education program, certain 
curricula should be used to complement and supplement health 
education curriculum materials for grades K-12. Substance 
misuse prevention and harm reduction may also be integrated 
into reading/language arts, social studies, and science classes. 
The National Health Education Standards and performance 
expectations provide the functional health knowledge, beliefs, 
and skills necessary for students to adopt and maintain healthy 
behaviors, reduce risk behaviors associated with substance 
misuse, achieve health literacy, and enhance health outcomes. 
 
 
 
The Boston Public Schools scope and sequence for Health 
Education recommends the following substance prevention 
curriculum, including: 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-01 
Page 2 of 9 
 
• CATCH Curriculum Grades K-6: Tobacco, Alcohol and Other 
Drug Prevention (contact the Office of Health and Wellness 
for access); 
• Essential Health Skills for Middle Schools & High Schools, G-
W Publisher: Tobacco, Alcohol and Other Drug Prevention 
(contact the Office of Health and Wellness for access); 
• Stanford University K-12, Tobacco Prevention Toolkit, which 
includes e-cigarette use of any type, including nicotine, 
cannabis/THC, and/or non-nicotine products; 
• Stanford University Grades 6-12, Cannabis Awareness and 
Prevention Toolkit.  
  
 
EARLY IDENTIFICATION AND INTERVENTION 
Even though a student may not possess or use substances at 
school, they may still have serious problems involving alcohol or 
drugs that demand the attention and assistance of school 
personnel. School nurses, school counselors and social 
workersphave been trainedin identification and the  medical 
effects of substance use or addiction. The District will continue to 
provide in-service programs and workshops, to craise staff 
awareness, understand the protocols and procedures in place 
when dealing with a student who is suspected of using or has 
been identified as needing support regarding substance abuse. 
School staff should be alert to those symptoms in students which 
may indicate problems with substance abuse and follow the 
protocols outlined in this circular. 
These symptoms may include one or more of the following: 
abrupt change in mood or attitude; sudden decline in attendance 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-01 
Page 3 of 9 
 
or performance in school; sudden resistance to discipline; 
impaired relationships with family or friends; drowsiness or 
inattention to discussion or surroundings; weight loss; inattention 
to dress; unusual flare-ups of temper; stealing; heightened 
secrecy about actions or possessions; and association with new 
friends, especially with individuals known to be substance users. 
 
SCREENING 
Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) 
focuses on prevention, early detection, risk assessment, brief 
counseling and referral for assessment that can be utilized in the 
school setting.  This tool is frequently used by the school nurse to 
assess the acuity of the problem and to develop next steps. Use 
of a validated screening tool will enable BPS school teams to 
detect risk for substance use related problems and brief 
intervention strategies will help to address these concerns at an 
early stage in adolescents. 
In March 2016, the Massachusetts Legislature enacted an Act 
relative to Substance Use, Treatment, Education and Prevention 
(STEP Act), which outlines the requirements for public schools in 
the Commonwealth to engage in substance use screening and 
education. Legislation can be found at 
https://malegislature.gov/Laws/SessionLaws/Acts/2016/Chapter52 
(see Sections 15, 63, 64, 66). 
BPS has implemented the use of the approved and validated 
CRAFFT-II screening tool that is approved by the Massachusetts 
Department of Public Health (DPH) and Department of 
Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE). Per legislation, 
SBIRT screening will be provided annually to students in grades 7 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-01 
Page 4 of 9 
 
and 9. Parents/guardians must be notified about the screening 
prior to the start of the year and must be given the option to opt 
out in writing. Please Refer to SBIRT in Schools. Staff conducting 
the SBIRT screening must complete a mandatory training 
through the MA Department of Public Health/BU Shield. 
SBIRT in Schools Resource Toolkit 
 
COUNSELING/REFERRAL 
When it is suspected that a student is either using or abusing 
marijuana, alcohol or other drugs, or there are strong indications 
that such is the case, the student should be referred to the school 
nurse for a wellness check, the school social worker and the 
parent/guardian/caregiver shall be notified.  The student may be 
referred to the Student Support Team(SST) and/or the school 
administrator for a referral to the voluntary Substance Use 
Program (SUP) at Succeed Boston.  The Substance Use Program 
(SUP) is a voluntary program for students whose use of drugs or 
alcohol is of concern. The program provides education and 
counseling about the effects of drugs, alcohol, and vaping and 
provides students with alternative ways to deal with stress. 
Referral for outside services will be provided as needed. The 
student may participate in the voluntary intensive program for 
up to five days and upon discharge will be referred to appropriate 
outside services.  Students may be referred to the Student 
Support Team (SST) by teachers or by any other school staff 
member. Students may self-refer because of a problem with 
substance abuse. The team should be prepared to assist the 
student by providing them with a source of early intervention in 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-01 
Page 5 of 9 
 
the form of individual or group counseling by a provider agency 
which serves the school or is available in the community.  
 
RE-ENTRY 
Follow-up is a crucial phase of a student's recovery after 
returning from treatment for substance abuse. An after-care 
program should be devised by school staff in collaboration with 
the facility which has provided treatment services. The plan 
should include a review of the student's school program with 
parents, guidance counselor, and case manager; placements in 
an appropriate class schedule; and follow-up meetings.   
 
REPORTING OF INCIDENTS RELATED TO DRUG/ALCOHOL USE 
1. 
All School Department personnel are under obligation to 
report to the principal, head of school, or other designated 
administrator any and all incidents or suspected incidents 
involving the use, possession, or distribution of any drug, 
alcoholic beverage, while they are under the authority of the 
Boston School Department. 
 
2. 
All School Department personnel are to understand that in 
the event they are subpoenaed to testify in a court of law or 
other proceeding, they are obligated to reveal any 
information pertaining to drug, alcohol, and weapons 
incidents, even if such information was given to them in 
confidence. 
 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-01 
Page 6 of 9 
 
3. 
All School personnel are to understand that they are 
prohibited from "making deals" with students whereby they 
agree not to notify law enforcement agencies of known or 
suspected illegal activities involving drug, alcohol, 
 
4. 
Each and every incident or suspected incident is to be 
reported immediately to the appropriate principal, head of 
school or designated administrator, in accordance with 
School Department policy and procedure. 
 
5. 
Students are considered to be under the authority of the 
Boston School Department when they are on School 
Department property, on School Department buses, at or 
near school bus stops, while on their way to or from school, 
or participating in school sponsored activities conducted off 
school grounds. 
 
6. 
Any student who is suspected of or who has admitted to 
being under the influence of drugs or alcohol must be 
immediately escorted to the office of the principal, head of 
school, or designated administrator. 
 
7. 
Students involved in incidents described in items 1, 5, and 6 
shall be considered in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 
94C (Controlled Substances Act), Chapter 138 (Alcoholic 
Liquors), Chapter 119 (Protection and Care of Children and 
Proceedings against Them), and Chapter 169-10 (Dangerous 
Weapons, Unlawfully Carrying). 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-01 
Page 7 of 9 
 
8. 
Use of drugs and/or alcohol is prohibited.Students deemed 
to be in violation of school rules after an investigation by the 
principal, head of school or designated administrator will be 
appropriately disciplined, but law enforcement and EMS 
assistance may be requested in cases where it is apparent 
that the student is engaging in disorderly or dangerous 
behavior.  
 
9. 
In some cases, if a student is found to be in possession of 
drugs, alcohol or weapons or to be under the influence of 
drugs or alcohol is to be considered in violation of 
Massachusetts General Law. In such cases the principal, 
head of school, or designated administrator is obligated to 
summon the Boston Police Department, which will assume 
responsibility for criminal prosecution in the event that such 
prosecution is warranted. 
 
10. 
In all such cases where students are found or suspected to 
be involved in any incident involving substance abuse, a 
safety specialist will take custody of any and all evidence 
including drugs and alcohol. 
 
11. 
The Department of Safety Services will coordinate record-
keeping functions. 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-01 
Page 8 of 9 
 
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES RELATING TO DRUG/ALCOHOL 
ABUSE 
 
1. 
Sections 7.7 .1 of the Code of Conduct requires that sale, 
distribution, or possession with intent to sell or distribute of 
any prescribed or non-prescribed controlled substances in 
school, on school grounds, or while under school jurisdiction 
may result in expulsion. 
 
2. 
Section 7.4.2 of the Code of Conduct allows for suspension, 
long term suspension, alternative program placement, or 
expulsion if a student is found in possession of any non-
prescribed controlled substance, narcotic drug, 
hallucinogenic drug, amphetamine, barbiturate, marijuana, 
alcoholic beverage, or intoxicant of any kind. 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director, Office of Health Services 
Department: 
Office of Health Services 
Mailing Address: 
443 Warren Street Suite 2, Dorchester, MA 
02121 
Phone: 
617-635-6788 
Email: 
Operations-Department-
Heads@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent   


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular SHS-01 
Page 9 of 9 
 
 
 


