Page 1:
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
AMT-06 
Version 01 
 
 
 
VOLUNTARY TRANSFER POLICY. 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded by a 
subsequent version. 
This updated policy provides clear guidance regarding the 
allowances and restrictions on school transfers, including an 
explanation of the types of transfers that would be considered 
voluntary or involuntary and the restrictions on the numbers of 
transfers allowed for different grade levels. This policy has 
evolved over time beginning with the 1992 Operating Guidelines 
for Implementing Changes in the Controlled Choice Student 
Assignment Plan and the1999 Interim Report on Streamlining the 
Boston Controlled Choice Student Assignment Plan. This circular 
does not appreciably shift policy or practice, but rather clarifies 
and updates language to reflect the current Home-Based 
Assignment Plan. 
In June 1999, the School Committee amended the policy of the 
Boston Public Schools covering voluntary transfers of students.  
The amendments provide for the following: 
Elementary school students (PK-6) may receive ONE (1) school 
transfer during an academic year. 
Middle school level students (grades 7 & 8) may receive ONE (1) 
school transfer during their middle school careers. 
High school students (9-12) may receive ONE (1) school transfer 
during their high school careers. 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular #AMT-6 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Change to school assignments due to change of address, safety, 
programmatic, moving off a waitlist, and disciplinary reasons are 
not considered voluntary transfers with respect to the number of 
transfers allowed.  
Students who permanently move out of their original home base 
are required to attend a school in their new home base; however, 
they may be allowed to continue in their current schools if their 
parent(s) request(s) continuation in the current schools in writing 
with Welcome Services and agrees to arrange and provide 
transportation. Students who move after April 1 will not be 
required to change schools until the following school year. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
 
Owner: 
Director of Student Assignment and Selective 
Admissions 
Department: 
Welcome Services 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, 2nd Floor, Roxbury, MA 
02119 
Phone: 
617-635-6058 
Email: 
ofca-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
                                                                   Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 


