Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular  
 NUMBER: 
EL-04 
Version 01 
 
 
TITLE I EXPENDITURES FOR ENGLISH LEARNERS 
AMENDED ORDER BETWEEN LATINO PARENTS ET AL 
AND BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. General Information 
2. English Learner Equity Requirement  
3. General Guidelines 
4. Sample Acceptable Uses 
5. Annual Reporting of Title I Services 
 
1. GENERAL INFORMATION 
In 1992, the Boston Public Schools (BPS) and parents of English 
Learner students (ELs), who were represented by attorneys with 
Multicultural Education, Training and Advocacy, Inc. (META), 
entered into a binding consent decree that is enforceable by use 
of the federal court’s power to hold violators in contempt of court 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 2 of 19 
 
 
to compel compliance. A copy of this consent decree can be 
found on the Office of English Learners website. 
This Superintendent’s Circular outlines the basic components of 
the consent decree regarding appropriate Title I expenditures for 
ELs and provides guidelines to comply with the edict. The 
consent decree defines many requirements of BPS, which 
includes the equitable allocation of Title I funds to service the 
needs of ELs.   
The federal consent decree enforced by META commits BPS to: 
• Improve and provide equal access to programs for EL 
students 
• Refrain from discriminating against EL students relative to 
non-ELs, in the provision of Title I services 
• Ensure proportionality in the provision of services; the 
percentage of Title I eligible but unserved EL students must 
not exceed the percentage non-ELs who are not benefiting 
from Title I funds 
• Adjust Title I school budgets for staff and services annually 
and periodically in light of changing student needs 
• Provide literacy (HILT) programs for EL students ages 8-22 
with limited or interrupted formal education (SLIFE) 
• Consult with and involve EL parents in each school 
(additional guidance on how to document this consultation 
will follow) 
• Report annually on the status of Title I services to EL 
students. 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 3 of 19 
 
 
Note:  
• All other district purchasing guidelines still apply. For 
general information regarding purchasing, please refer to 
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-07. 
• For state guidance on the use of Title I Part A funds in 
general (not specific to the additional requirements 
pursuant to the consent decree), visit 
https://www.doe.mass.edu/federalgrants/titlei-a/ or contact 
the BPS Grants Department.  
2. ENGLISH LEARNER EQUITY REQUIREMENT 
The portion of Title 1 resources for EL students is based on the 
percentage of EL population in that school.  
EL Equity Amount example: If School-A receives $100,000 in Title 
I funding with a school population consisting of 25% ELs, $25,000 
must be spent to benefit ELs. In this example, $25,000 is the “EL 
Equity amount” that must be spent on supplemental services 
directly and solely benefitting ELs.   
As part of the BPS annual Budget Collaborative process, the 
Finance Department provides each school their Title I allocation 
and identifies for schools the EL Equity Amount subject to the 
spending guidelines outlined in this circular.  
• A school’s Title I allocation is determined based on the 
school’s percentage of direct certified students and 
projected enrollment, multiplied by a per pupil amount. 
Direct certification, in compliance with USED and DESE, 
includes data from the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 4 of 19 
 
 
Program (SNAP), Temporary Assistance for Needy Families 
(TANF), and Medicaid enrollment.  
• Within the school’s Title I allocation, the EL Equity Amount is 
separately identified. This is calculated based on the 
projected enrollment of English Learner students as a 
percentage of the overall enrollment of projected students 
at each school. 
3. GENERAL GUIDELINES 
The META Consent Decree requires the following: 
1) Each individual school must determine the additional 
services for EL students that will supplement their 
instruction, either for academic language in English and/or 
through native language supports. 
2) This determination must be conducted prior to spending 
Title I funds for ELs at a school.  
3) These services must be supplemental, solely benefit ELs, 
and be tailored to meet the specific needs of EL students.  
4) The district, through the Office of English Learners, as part of 
its monitoring duties under the META Consent Decree, is 
obliged to ensure compliance with these legal 
requirements, including working with schools to make 
appropriate revisions to any budget that does not reflect 
compliance with Title I and META Consent Decree 
requirements. 
5) Each school must annually submit both a plan for spending 
prior to any expenditures as well as an annual checklist that 
reports the use of Title I for ELs funds.  
Services Tailored to Meet the Specific Needs of ELs 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 5 of 19 
 
 
Services provided with the use of Title I EL funds need to be 
tailored to meet the specific linguistic, cultural, socio-emotional 
and academic needs of ELs. These needs should be identified as 
part of the needs assessment process required by the consent 
decree. 
Services Solely Benefitting ELs 
Title I expenditures for ELs are also required to solely benefit ELs. 
This means, for instance, if a school desires to fund a position, the 
responsibilities for that position must be solely dedicated to ELs.   
There is an expectation that the services provided by the staff 
should focus on EL students with the highest needs such as 
those with English language development (ELD) levels 1 and 2, as 
they are the most vulnerable group of students requiring 
supplemental services.  
4. SAMPLE ACCEPTABLE USES 
Supplement and Not Supplant Rule 
Title I for ELs funds must be used to supplement, and not 
supplant, local, state or federal resources available or required 
under state or federal law to meet the educational needs of ELs. 
In other words, these Title I funds should not take the place of—
supplant—public education services that are to be provided by 
law to English Learner students. Instead, these funds must be 
used to supplement requisite education services, to provide 
services that go above and beyond what is otherwise required. 
Here are a few examples:  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 6 of 19 
 
 
• Funding lunch monitors is an inappropriate use for which 
BPS was previously cited, since maintaining order in the 
lunchroom is a basic function that is not above and beyond 
what the district would do without Title I dollars and is also a 
function that does not solely benefit ELs. 
• General classroom supplies needed for everyday classroom 
instruction (e.g., paper, notebooks, white boards) would not 
constitute an allowable use of these funds, even if they only 
are used by ESL or other EL program classrooms, as the 
supplies are not supplemental in nature.  
• It would not be allowable to use these funds to purchase 
core curriculum materials — including core ESL materials — 
for English Learner students. 
• Equally important is that even if an expenditure is 
supplemental by nature, it would be a violation of the 
“supplement, not supplant” rule to fund a service or activity 
for ELs out of the TItle I for ELs funds while also funding the 
same service or activity with general funds for other 
students at the school. For example, if a school purchases 
technology with general funds for general education 
classrooms, it would generally not be allowable to use the 
Title I EL funds to purchase the same technology for English 
Learner program classrooms. Potential allowances may be 
made if the technology is provided on a 1:1 basis for ELs only, 
and not for students as a whole. 
Note: The consent decree allows for an important exception to 
the “supplement, not supplant” rule: generally, expenditures 
related to the High Intensity for Literacy Training for Students 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 7 of 19 
 
 
with Limited or Interrupted Formal Education (HILT for SLIFE) 
program constitute an allowable use of these Title I EL funds. 
The following table provides a list of sample acceptable uses of 
Title I for ELs funds.  
• It is important to note that this list is not exhaustive, and 
that the “supplement, not supplant” provision still applies. 
Additional examples are posted on the Office of English 
Learners Title I for ELs website.  
• School leaders are advised to discuss their ideas for the use 
of these funds with the Title I EL coordinator 
(Title1EL@bostonpublicschools.org) to ensure compliance. 
 
Sample Acceptable Uses of Title I Funds for English Learners 
• High Intensive Literacy Training for Students with Limited or 
Interrupted Formal Education (HILT for SLIFE) programs: 
strongly recommended to be funded through Title I for ELs 
funds. 
• Extra learning time outside of the school day: materials and 
stipends for after-school, summer, and Saturday programs 
tailored specifically to meet the needs of ELs. 
• Supplementary enrichment and accelerated curriculum 
materials for ELs. 
• Supplementary materials, including native language 
resources, that strengthen the core academic program for 
ELs in the school. 
• Supplementary counseling, pupil services, and mentoring 
services for ELs that is above and beyond what is offered to 
all students at the school. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 8 of 19 
 
 
• College and career awareness programs solely for ELs that 
are above and beyond what is offered to all students at the 
school. 
• Methods to assess the efficacy of all implemented strategies 
(such as stipends for after-school monitoring and planning 
meetings) for ELs. 
• High-quality ongoing professional development for 
teachers, administrators, paraprofessionals, parents, and/or 
pupil services personnel that is not otherwise required and 
is geared specifically towards meeting the needs of ELs. 
• Increasing EL parental involvement through literacy 
services. 
• Consulting to strengthen the core academic standards or 
the school improvement plan to meet the specific needs of 
ELs. 
• Assessment fees associated with an EL student obtaining 
the Seal of Biliteracy. 
• A supplemental bilingual paraprofessional (not for class size 
reasons) to assist former SLIFE students who exit SLIFE into 
SEI content classes but who need continuing native 
language support. 
 
Previous Findings of Non-compliance 
The following are examples of inappropriate usages of Title I to 
count towards the EL equity percentage: 
• Since ESL instruction is considered core, funding of a sole 
ESL teacher to provide ESL for all ELs in the school is 
considered supplanting. However, it is acceptable for this 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 9 of 19 
 
 
purpose if it is used to supplement the core ESL 
requirements by providing additional ESL support or 
providing smaller group instruction to students targeting 
ELs with ELD levels 1 and 2. 
• Funding instructional or other basic supplies (copy paper, 
classroom supplies, notebooks, chart paper, printer 
cartridges, etc.) are basic classroom supplies needed for any 
classroom and would therefore be a clear example of 
supplanting. Similarly, Title I EL monies may neither be used 
to satisfy the district’s minimum $1,000 supply budget per 
school nor the minimum supply to be budgeted per 
student. 
• Funding lunch monitors is an illegal use for which BPS was 
previously cited, since maintaining order in the lunchroom is 
a basic function and not above and beyond what the district 
would do without Title I dollars.  
• Title I EL funds may not be applied to the salaries of general 
administrative personnel. 
• Shifting a position from general funds that is a core position 
to Title I is a clear indication of supplanting and not an 
appropriate Title I EL expenditure. 
• Funding positions that serve the whole school, such as 
family and community outreach coordinator, physical 
education, computer, music/art teacher, school wide 
counselors, school wide literacy coordinators, school wide 
paraprofessionals, and parent coordinators/liaisons would 
be considered supplanting and therefore would not be an 
allowable use of these funds. 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 10 of 19 
 
 
5. ANNUAL REPORTING OF TITLE I SERVICES  
Title I funding for ELs is reported annually to META by the Office 
of English Learners (OEL). School leaders must submit a Title I EL 
Budget Plan (1) during  their Budget Collaborative during January 
and a Title I for ELs Budget Monitoring Checklist by June of the 
current school year to OEL. Using this Title I checklist, school 
leaders will be asked to verify and report what services the Title I 
funded staff have provided, number of students serviced, and 
additional resources/supplies purchased within the year.  
Title I EL Budget Plan (future year budget): Each school will 
receive a Title I EL Budget Plan that is pre-populated with the 
schools’ Title I EL allocation for the upcoming fiscal year. The Title 
I EL Budget Plan requires school leaders to identify the needs 
assessment that undergirds their planned spending, and to 
identify categories of planned spending (e.g., staffing, 
supplemental instructional supplies, contractual services, 
stipends, etc.). 
During a school’s budget collaborative, each school leader is to 
submit their EL Budget Plan.  A school’s budget collaborative will 
not be considered approved until the school’s Title I EL Budget 
Plan is finalized and the budget lines can be structured 
accordingly in FutureForce. School leaders are encouraged to 
schedule appointments with their EL school support liaison for 
support.  
 
(1) Template. May be updated with feedback from stakeholders. 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 11 of 19 
 
 
The following represents general considerations for school 
leaders to aid them in preparing sufficient plans:  
Needs Assessment 
● The META consent decree specifies that, prior to spending 
Title I for ELs funds at schools, the determination of the 
services most needed by the school’s ELs must be 
conducted first to ensure that the funds will be used to 
support the language development needs of English 
Learner students.  
● Schools should review multiple data points to identify the 
needs of their English Learner student population, keeping 
in mind that English Learners do not constitute a monolithic 
group. 
● At a minimum, English Learner students’ ACCESS 
performance and progress data should be reviewed. 
Additional data to be reviewed may include: MCAS and 
interim/formative assessment data; attendance data; 
student/parent surveys; school Equity Roundtable notes; 
students’ Individual Learning Plans for SLIFE or ELs who 
have not met ACCESS benchmarks; etc. 
○ Schools should disaggregate the data for different EL 
subgroups; e.g., EL students with disabilities, Students 
with Limited or Interrupted Formal Education, 
newcomers, long-term English Learners, etc.  
● School leaders should consult the LATF and other EL 
teachers as well as with English Learner parents when 
developing their Title I EL Budget Plan. School leaders may 
also consider consulting with English Learner students. 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 12 of 19 
 
 
● When considering the types of goods and services to 
include in their Title I EL Budget Plan, school leaders should 
also consider the effectiveness of purchases made with prior 
Title I EL funds on improving EL student achievement. 
Budgeting for an FTE 
● If requesting an ESL FTE, make sure the minimum ESL FTE 
requirement is met within your general funds before 
submitting an additional request on your EL Title 1 
allocation. This should only be a supplemental position. This 
FTE cannot deliver core ESL instruction to meet minimum 
ESL instructional compliance. 
● Identify how the position primarily serves ELD 1 and 2 
students if applicable. 
● Both salary and benefits need to be accounted for. 
● It will be the school leader’s responsibility to ensure that this 
FTE does not perform job responsibilities other than those 
approved with the use of the Title I EL funds. 
 
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 13 of 19 
 
 
Budgeting for Stipends 
● If requesting stipends for supplemental EL instructional 
support outside of school hours, make sure that staff are 
appropriately qualified (e.g., ESL license, SEI endorsement, 
bilingual endorsement) to instruct ELs. Specify the nature of 
the services provided to demonstrate that core ESL 
instruction is not being delivered through these stipends.  
● Additionally, LATF duties are not permitted to be 
compensated through these stipends. Ensure that all 
stipend requests adhere to district policy. 
Budgeting for Contractual Services 
● If requesting contractual services for professional 
development, make sure to demonstrate that the PD 
provider is appropriately qualified to provide training on 
English Learner instruction and that the PD is specific to 
English Learner instruction or supports.  
● Schools can review the OEL website to identify other 
approved professional development that can be targeted for 
students or parents to integrate native language and 
cultural learning opportunities as part of the school PD 
offerings. 
Budgeting for Supplies/Materials/Technology 
● If requesting technology, make sure the technology is not 
already in the school being used by non-ELs and that it is 
not used for mandated assessments (e.g., ACCESS, MCAS).  
● If you’re requesting books/instructional materials, make sure 
to indicate how this supplements the requisite or core 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 14 of 19 
 
 
curriculum and how it is specifically designed for English 
Learners. 
The following provides a sample exemplar for the type of 
rationale that needs to be included in the Title I EL Budget Plan. 
QUESTION: How is this supplemental?  
● Weak Rationale: This text is supplemental because it is in 
addition to the core work.  
● Strong Rationale: This text provides a brief, accessible guide 
to this textbook to make the content comprehensible to 
ELs, especially EL 1 and 2 students. This is a supplement to 
traditional textbook and primary source materials for 
teaching this class. Newcomer students often haven't been 
taught this curriculum, so it is even more important to 
communicate the essentials of this work (which many 
general education students might already have learned).  
○ Difference: This differs from the weak example because 
it includes detail on how the text will be used in the 
classroom and demonstrates supplemental use.  
QUESTION: How will this solely benefit ELs?   
● Weak: This will only be used for ELs. ELDs 1-3. 
● Strong: This text has allowed me to make the content 
accessible, especially for ELs with ELD levels 1-3. Newcomer 
students often haven't been taught this curriculum, so it is 
even more important to communicate the essentials of this 
work (which many general education students might 
already have learned).   
○ Difference: This differs from the weak example because 
it shows that non-EL students would not benefit from 


Page 15:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 15 of 19 
 
 
this book and that the ELs would need the book to help 
them access the content and narrative. 
QUESTION: How is this tailored to meet the needs of your EL 
students?  
● Weak: This text is only used in ESL specific classrooms.  
● Strong: The visual and shorter, chunked text provides 
comprehensible input for students to master the concepts 
in the traditional reading. This topic is especially important 
for this time period both because my newcomer students 
consistently express interest in learning about these two 
events and because there are so many events within this 
time period that a supplemental text would help students 
follow the narrative. 
○ Difference: This differs from the weak example because 
it demonstrates how the text is tailored to meet the 
language needs of the EL students by stating it has 
visuals and shorter texts.  
Title I EL Budget Monitoring Checklist (current year actual 
spending): Whereas the Title I EL Budget Plan identifies the 
intended use of the funds, the Title I EL Budget Monitoring 
Checklist identifies how the funds were actually spent and 
provides the rationale to demonstrate how the identified goals 
within the Title I EL Budget Plan from the previous year were 
met.  Once the district’s spending deadline has passed, the Title I 
EL coordinator provides each school leader with their own 
checklist document that is pre-populated with each line item of 
requisitions and stipends. Prior to the close of the school year, 
school leaders review the rationale they provided at the time of 
the purchase request, sign the document, and return it to the 
Title I EL coordinator. 


Page 16:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 16 of 19 
 
 
MONITORING COMPLIANCE 
The district submits each school’s Title I EL Budget Plan and Title 
I EL Budget Monitoring Checklist to META attorneys. Note: In the 
event a school leader fails to comply with the submission 
deadlines, the district may not process purchase requests that 
fall under the school’s Title I EL budget lines until such 
compliance is met. 
The Title I EL funds are denoted in a school or department’s Fund 
200 budget with a program code of 24xx. For instance, for FY23, 
the budget line would include BPS23150 (Title I) and a program 
code of 24xx (e.g., 2401). The use of these funds is subject to the 
terms of the META consent decree and this circular. 
Throughout the school year, the Title I EL coordinator 
(title1EL@bostonpublicschools.org) will review each requisition 
for purchase (e.g., requisitions, stipends, EAEs, FTEs, budget 
transfers, etc.) to ensure that the given request meets Title I EL 
spending guidelines and aligns to the school’s approved Title I EL 
Budget Plan. The Title I EL coordinator tracks each purchase and 
its rationale for annual reporting purposes. 
● When a given request has not been included in a school’s 
Title I EL Budget Plan, the Title I EL coordinator will request 
additional information from the school to ensure 
compliance.  
● The Budget and Finance departments will not process any 
requests without prior written approval from the Title I EL 
coordinator. 
The Title I EL coordinator may also request additional information 
throughout the school year when necessary to ensure that 
spending remains in compliance. The district reserves the right to 


Page 17:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 17 of 19 
 
 
implement additional monitoring requirements throughout the 
school year. 
Timely spending: Responsibility Centers receive monthly BAIS 
Financials output reports that identify the balance of available 
Title I EL funds. It is the responsibility of school leaders and 
department heads to ensure that funds are spent appropriately 
and in a timely manner to support the unique needs of English 
Learner students most effectively.  
● To ensure appropriate spending, all unspent Title I EL funds 
at the school level will be re-allocated to the Office of 
English Learners at the close of the fiscal year for 
appropriate spend- down. 
META visits and requests for information: META monitors 
compliance by way of reviewing the Title I EL Budget Plans and 
the end-of-year Title I EL Budget Monitoring Checklists, as well as 
conducting school visits. During the visit, META will meet with 
the school team and may review the school’s current and 
projected budget, Title I checklist, staff qualifications, and other 
information deemed necessary to comply with the Consent 
Decree.  
● Schools will be supported by the Office of English Learners 
and Grants Department prior to any such visits.  
● School personnel who receive direct contact from META 
attorneys with requests for information outside the context 
of a scheduled visit are directed to contact the BPS Office of 
Legal Advisor at legal@bostonpublicschools.org for 
guidance. 


Page 18:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 18 of 19 
 
 
KEY DATES 
Responsible 
Activity 
Date 
School Leader 
Submit FY25 Title I EL 
Budget Plan (planned 
expenditures for the 
following school year) to 
Title I EL Coordinator for 
approval 
Dec. 2023/Jan. 2024 
(prior to Budget 
Collaborative) 
OEL  
Review and approve 
submitted FY25 Title I 
EL Budget Plan 
(planned expenditures 
for the following school 
year)  
Dec. 2023/Jan. 2024 
(prior to Budget 
Collaborative) 
Office of Legal 
Advisor 
Submit annual Title I 
report to META 
January 2024 
School Leader 
Submit FY24 Title I EL 
Checklist to OEL/Grants 
(accounting of 
expenditures from the 
current school year) 
June 2024 (after 
spending deadline) 
September 2024 (if 
applicable, for any 
2024 summer 
spending) 
OEL  
Review and analyze 
submitted FY24 Title I 
EL Checklist to 
OEL/Grants   
July 2024   
 


Page 19:
Superintendent’s Circular EL-04 
Page 19 of 19 
 
 
RESOURCES 
Title I for English Learners website: 
https://www.bostonpublicschools.org/title1el.  
Guidance is also included annually in the district’s Budget 
Collaborative and Probable Organization guidance document for 
school leaders. 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Executive Director, or  
Director of Grants and External Funds 
Department: 
Office of English Learners or Finance 
Department 
Mailing Address: 2300 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9435 or 617-635-6995 
Email: 
all-acad-division@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
     Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 


