Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
FIN-04 
Version 01 
 
 
 
STUDENT ACTIVITY ACCOUNTS:  
OPERATING PROCEDURES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
OVERVIEW 
This Student Activity Accounts: Operating Procedures 
Superintendent’s Circular was put together in accordance with 
Massachusetts General Law Chapter 71 Section 47. The Student 
Activity Account Policy was approved by the School Committee 
in the fall of 2018.  
All students should have an opportunity to take part in co-
curricular activities. As such, Boston Public Schools have 
migrated to a new business process for managing student 
activity accounts. Student activity funds are managed under an 
“Agency Account,” housed under the City’s tax ID number.  
DEFINITION AND CATEGORIES OF STUDENT ACTIVITY 
ACCOUNTS  
Student activity accounts may only be used for the express 
purpose of conducting student activities, which are broadly 
defined to be:  
● Co-curricular in nature.  
● Contingent on a fee or on fundraising.  
● For the sole benefit of students.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 2 of 13 
 
 
Boston Public Schools recognizes the following categories as 
student activities:  
● SOCAL = Socials, such as a dance or pizza party 
● EVENT= Special events, such as a graduation or Science Fair 
● FLDTR = Field trips, such as transportation costs or entrance 
fees 
● CLUBS = School leader-approved student clubs, such as a 
Student Council or Debate Club 
● STORE = Bookstore, only when bookstore is run by students 
and proceeds will benefit students directly 
● ATHLT = Athletics, only when funds are student-driven and 
proceeds will benefit specific student activities directly 
● SNDRY = Miscellaneous activities (this is NOT a catch-all, see 
Student Activity Accounts on the BPS website for approved 
list) 
● BNKFE = Bank fees, such as fees for returned checks 
ESTABLISHING A STUDENT ACTIVITY ACCOUNT 
Student activity funds will be managed utilizing a Student 
Activity Agency Account. The Agency Account is a master 
account maintained by the City’s Collector-Treasurer and is 
utilized to record deposits and expenses. All student activity 
accounts must utilize the City of Boston’s tax ID number and be 
authorized by the BPS chief financial officer and city treasurer.  
Schools seeking to set up a new student activity account within 
the Student Activity Agency Account must contact the BPS 
Finance Office.  
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 3 of 13 
 
When a new school leader begins at a BPS school, they should 
contact the BPS Finance Office. Accounts should be reconciled 
prior to the account changing hands.  
DEPOSIT PROCEDURE 
To deposit funds into your school’s student activity account: 
1. Deposit funds at a Boston Citizens Bank branch using the 
unique deposit slips provided to your school. This is critical to 
ensuring funds are deposited to your school’s subaccount 
and simplifying the reconciliation process. 
a. If depositing funds for use in multiple different student 
activities, schools must use a separate deposit slip for 
each pool of money. 
2. Complete the revenue breakdown form within 2 business 
days of the deposit date to designate the funds to a program 
(SOCAL, EVENT, FLDTR, CLUBS, STORE, ATHLT, SNDRY, 
BNKFE) and class (grade level). This allows the deposited 
funds to be applied to your school’s subaccount and 
reflected in BAIS Financials.  
a. If a deposit is for multiple grades or undefined, utilize 
the “0000” for all grades.  
3. Allow at least 5 business days for the deposit to be booked to 
your school’s subaccount and reflected in BAIS Financials. 
Schools must notify the BPS Finance Office when they are 
running low on unique deposit slips, not when they’ve run out of 
deposit slips, so additional deposit slips may be ordered and 
delivered to the school.  
 
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 4 of 13 
 
TRANSFER PROCEDURE 
To request a transfer within your school’s student activity 
account:  
1. Submit the transfer request form, which requires a 
justification letter be attached documenting the request.  
Transfer Request Justification Template 
2. Allow at least 5 business days for the transfer to be reflected 
in BAIS Financials.  
EXPENDITURE PROCEDURE 
Standard Purchasing 
To make a purchase out of your school’s student activity account:  
1. Confirm the company/venue is already an approved city 
vendor by looking them up in BAIS Financials or determine if 
the individual needs to be “hired” and paid through the city’s 
payroll system. 
a. If you have a question about whether a 
company/venue is an approved city vendor or should 
be hired, please email 
Vendor.Questions@cityofboston.gov or call 617-635-
4564. 
b. New vendors should register online (see step-by-step 
guidelines for registering online).  
2. After confirming the company/venue is an approved city 
vendor, enter a requisition for student activities using the 
following information:  
Fund Number: 470 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 5 of 13 
 
Account: Should be appropriate to the requisition. An 
example is account 52811 for a field trip. If unsure, review 
the account code list or contact BPS Purchasing.  
Program: An alpha entry matching the revenue breakdown 
of SOCAL, EVENT, FLDTR, CLUBS, STORE, ATHLT, SNDRY, or 
BNKFE. 
Class: An alphanumeric entry matching the revenue 
breakdown of: 0000 (all grades); BPSK0; BPSK1; BPSK2; 
BPS01; BPS02; BPS03; BPS04; BPS05; BPS06; BPS07; BPS08; 
BPS09; BPS10; BPS11; BPS12 
Bud Ref: 0000 
3. Follow the standard purchasing guidelines outlined in the 
Business Services Manual to complete the requisition and 
purchase process.  
Reimbursement 
To request a reimbursement out of your school’s student activity 
account: 
1. Confirm the person is already properly hired or an approved 
city vendor by looking them up in BAIS Financials.  
b. If you have a question about whether a 
company/venue is an approved city vendor or should 
be hired, please email 
Vendor.Questions@cityofboston.gov or call 617-635-
4564. 
c. New vendors should register online (see step-by-step 
guidelines for registering online).  


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 6 of 13 
 
2. After confirming the person is an approved city vendor, 
complete and submit a hard copy of the Non Order form 
with details of the expense, funding source, and amount. 
Reimbursement instructions can be found in 
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-03.  
 
Staff seeking reimbursement out of the Student Activity Account 
can receive reimbursement for tax on purchases; however, tax 
can be saved by going through the standard purchasing process.  
Reach out to Lisa Greaves or Bob Cass with any reimbursement 
questions.  
The Business Services Guide may be a helpful resource for further 
inquiries on purchasing. 
CHECKING STUDENT ACTIVITY ACCOUNT BALANCES 
To check your school’s student activity account balance:  
1. Log into BAIS Financials. 
2. From the main menu drop-down options, select 
REPORTING TOOLS. 
3. From Reporting Tools, select QUERY. 
4. Click on QUERY VIEWER. 
5. Next to “Search by,” select QUERY NAME from the drop-
down options. 
6. In the blank next to “begins with,” enter 
Y_GL_QRY_SCH_ACT_BUDGET_BAL. 
7. Select how you'd like to run the report: HTML, Excel, or XML. 
8. In the blank next to “department,” enter your school’s 6-
digit RC code.  
9. Click VIEW RESULTS: 
a. Scroll through all the line items to find balances (there 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 7 of 13 
 
will likely be several rows that show no balance) OR  
b. Download the results and filter out all the rows without 
a balance.  
To check deposits and expenditures in your school’s student 
activity account:  
1. Log into BAIS Financials  
2. From the main menu drop down options, select REPORTING 
TOOLS. 
3. From Reporting Tools, select QUERY. 
4. Click on QUERY VIEWER. 
5. Next to “Search by,” select QUERY NAME from the drop-
down options.  
6. In the blank next to “begins with,” enter 
Y_GL_QRY_EXP_PO_CN_DTL. 
7. Select how you'd like to run the report: HTML, Excel, or XML. 
8. Enter the following for the blanks:  
a. Fund Code: 470 
b. Organization: Your school’s 6-digit RC Code 
c. Program Code: % 
d. Sub-Classification: % 
e. Project/Grant: % 
f. Account: % 
g. Budget Reference: % 
h. From Accounting Period: 1 
i. To Accounting Period: 12 
j. From Fiscal Year: Starting year (for example, if you just 
want to look at this current school year, you’d enter 
2024, but if you wanted to look at the account over 
time, you’d enter 2018). 
k. To Fiscal Year: Ending year. 
9. Click VIEW RESULTS. 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 8 of 13 
 
REPORTING 
Monthly Reconciliation Reports 
By the 5th of each month (September - July):  
1. Complete the monthly reconciliation report for the previous 
month, reconciling your school’s PeopleSoft balance with 
submitted revenue breakdown forms and expenditure 
requests. 
2. Completed monthly reconciliations should be sent to school 
leader, all student organization leadership (and/or parent 
council leadership if elementary school), and Charlie Ng by 
the 5th of each month for the previous month (example: for 
the February reconciliation, submit by March 5). PDFs should 
be uploaded to your school’s SAA reporting folder and saved 
for 7 years.  
Year End Reconciliation 
By June 21:  
1. Complete Form B for each additional bank account 
associated with the school (Form B doesn’t need to be 
completed for the student activity and before/after school 
accounts) and record every transaction for each account. 
Additional bank accounts include 501c3, BEDF, Parent 
Council, and Sunshine Fund accounts.  
2. A final monthly reconciliation report should be submitted by 
July 5 to close out the student activity account for the school 
year 
3. Completed forms should be sent to Charlie Ng.  


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 9 of 13 
 
CASH POLICY AND RECORD-KEEPING 
Internal Records And Ledgers 
Schools must keep detailed records of their receipts and 
expenses for the account. Records should contain, at minimum, 
the level of detail provided in the example ledger by line. The 
specific purpose/activity of all money should be tracked. It is 
recommended that for individual activities, such as a specific 
field trip or event, schools also track all receipts and expenses (i.e., 
all revenue and expenses for prom). A copy of these records 
should be housed in your school’s SAA folder. The purpose of 
these records is to:  
● Ensure bank deposits match the total receipts of fees and 
fund-raised money. 
● Ensure entirety of the money is spent on the intended 
purpose, benefiting solely the students who the money was 
raised for/by. 
● Avoid large surpluses and deficit spending. 
Cash Policy 
Cash boxes may be used to receive cash and checks and make 
change during fundraising activities.  
As needed, the cash box may be signed out to staff and student 
organizations as long as a cash box log is completed each time 
the cash box is signed out.  
Schools need to keep records of collected cash and checks. When 
$10 or more is collected from an individual, a pre-printed carbon 
receipt must be issued to that individual. Carbon copies of 
receipts should be submitted to the school leader along with 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 10 of 13 
 
collected cash and checks WITHIN 24 HOURS of receipt. In cases 
of a large number of transactions in a short period of time, the 
receipt log should be used to provide a record of individual 
transactions and be submitted to the school leader along with 
collected cash and checks WITHIN 24 HOURS of receipt. 
When less than $10 is collected from an individual, a pre-printed 
carbon receipt does not need to be issued. Rather, the person 
handling the cash box needs to record the collected funds on the 
receipt log. The receipt log should be submitted to the school 
leader along with collected cash / checks WITHIN 24 HOURS of 
receipt.  
The cash box must be reconciled daily by two individuals. Once 
the cash is counted, each individual should initial the cash box 
reconciliation form. 
Collected cash / checks totaling under $1,500 must be deposited 
at a Boston Citizens Bank branch WITHIN A WEEK of receipt. 
Total collected cash / checks exceeding $1,500 must be deposited 
at a Boston Citizens Bank branch WITHIN 72 HOURS of receipt.  
 
 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 11 of 13 
 
CLOSURE OF ACCOUNTS 
Closure of Class Accounts at Graduation 
The following procedures should be followed with respect to 
class accounts at graduation:  
1. Keep class accounts open and active for 90 days after 
graduation to allow for outstanding bills to be received and 
paid.  
2. After 90 days, remaining funds must either be: 
a. Transferred to a separate account established by class 
members, not using the city’s tax ID number. 
b. Transferred to the school’s SNDRY, 0000 (all grades) 
line. 
Closure of Inactive Accounts  
The following procedures should be followed with respect to 
inactive and undesignated accounts at the district level:  
1. Accounts will be closed, and remaining balances will be 
transferred to the Student Activity Agency Account. 
2. Remaining balances will be distributed across all schools’ 
SNDRY, 0000 (all grades) lines. 
The following procedures should be followed with respect to 
inactive accounts at the school level:  
1. Provide written notification about the inactive account to 
the BPS Finance Office.  
2. If the account should be closed out and has a balance of 
funds:  
a. The balance of recognized student activity funds 
should be moved into the appropriate program and 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 12 of 13 
 
class subaccounts. 
b. The balance of unrecognized student activity funds 
should be moved into the school’s SNDRY, 0000 (all 
grades) line. 
RESOURCES 
For additional information and resources on Student Activity 
Accounts:  
● Student Activity Account: Policies & Procedures Manual 
Student Activity Account Website  
● SAA Slide Deck 
● 7-minute Overview Presentation 
● Purchasing Manual  
● Massachusetts General Law 
Please contact the Finance Office if you have any student activity 
account questions not addressed in this circular. 
Questions related to deposits, fund balances, and account status 
should be directed to: 
Special Accounts Manager, finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
Internal Controls Project Manager, finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-04 
Page 13 of 13 
 
Questions related to purchases from this account should be 
directed to:  
Assistant Business Manager, finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org / 617-635-6758  
Questions related to reimbursements from this account should 
be directed to: 
Principal Account Clerk finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org / 
617-635-9472 
 
Unit Leader of Business Services/Accounts Payable  
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org / 617-635-9469 
 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


