Page 1:
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER:  
FIN-02 
Version 01 
 
 
MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENT 
 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
Boston Public School employees who are eligible for mileage 
reimbursement are required by IRS regulation to document 
those costs and provide specific information.  Reimbursement 
cannot be made unless all procedures detailed in this circular are 
followed and all necessary documentation is provided. 
 
All employees who use their own vehicle on authorized school 
business are entitled to be reimbursed as listed below.  Please 
note that travel to and from your home is not eligible for 
reimbursement. 
 
 
All Itinerant Service Providers 
School Psychologists, District Social 
Workers, Speech & Language 
Pathologists, Occupational Therapists, 
Physical Therapists, Adaptive Physical 
Education Teachers, Vision Teachers (ISP 
will receive that $600 payment in 
succeeding years provide the ISP’s direct 
supervisor verifies that the ISP’s travel 
schedule is substantially unchanged) 
 
$600.00 per “full” 
school year (flat 
rate)  
or 
67¢ per mile  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-02b 
Page 2 of 5 
 
  
 
All other BTU members 
 
67¢ per mile  
 
Supervisors of Attendance    
                      
 
67¢ per mile 
 
 
BASAS 
 
 
 
67¢ per mile  
 
Management 
 
 
 
67¢ per mile 
 
 
 
 
Planning & Engineering   
       
 
$15.00 per day (flat 
rate) 
 
 
 
For eligible mileage reimbursement, there must be a sufficient 
appropriation in the respective responsibility center manager’s 
budget (Account 52803 Mileage). 
 
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-02b 
Page 3 of 5 
 
  
 
IMPORTANT! 
Parking fees, tolls, other transportation fares; Lyfts/Ubers, MBTA 
individual fares only (monthly passes are not reimbursable) etc., 
will be reimbursed only when it is clearly stated that the trip 
taken, which resulted in these fees, was for official school 
business and the method of transport was the most economical.  
Original receipts must be produced/provided for reimbursement. 
 
Follow the procedures below to submit for reimbursement 
(Emails accepted): 
 
1. Submit a completed “City of Boston Special Draft/Non Order 
Form” – it must be filled out completely with: 
• School/Department 
• Date 
• Full name of the person being reimbursed 
• Full address of the person being reimbursed 
• Vendor # 
• Full funding source 
• Full “detailed” description 
• Amount to be reimbursed 
• Must be signed by the employee’s immediate 
supervisor 
 
2. Submit the “Certification Form” attesting “under penalty of 
perjury that amounts stated are correct and were incurred 
in the service of the City of Boston.”   
 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-02b 
Page 4 of 5 
 
  
3. Submit a completed “Mileage Detail Form” - List the total 
number of miles traveled each day and total-up each page – 
must sign and date each page. 
 
4. Submit all receipts - tolls, parking, ubers/lyfts, MBTA 
individual fares only, etc. 
 
5. Mileage Reimbursement requests “must be” submitted at 
the end of each month or quarterly – 4 times per year, which 
is September 30, December 31, March 31 and the last day of 
school in June. 
 
6. Employee group (union) affiliation must be indicated to 
insure eligibility for reimbursement. 
 
 
 
REMINDER:  You must be registered on the City of Boston 
Vendor/Supplier Portal file in order to be reimbursed.  Go to 
www.boston.gov/procurement   click on "Go to Supplier Portal" 
and follow the instructions.  Wait until you are an approved 
vendor and have acquired your vendor number before 
submitting for reimbursement. 
 
 
If Submitting by Paper: 
● ONLY Submit Single-Sided reimbursements packet – Not 
Double Sided.  Also, no smaller than 12 Font and only on 8x11 
white paper. 
● DO NOT highlight or put scotch tape on receipts because it 
fades the receipts – use staples, only legible receipts will be 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-02b 
Page 5 of 5 
 
  
reimbursed – Must submit copies on 8x11 paper of all cash 
register receipts. 
 
 
IMPORTANT REMINDER 
The Fiscal School Year ends on June 30 each year and July 1 starts 
the new Fiscal School Year. 
 
Reimbursements that are not submitted within the School Fiscal 
Year will be in jeopardy of non-payment. 
 
** You cannot use current school year funds to pay for prior 
school year expenses. ** 
 
 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Name: 
Business Manager 
Department: 
Business Services 
Mailing 
Address: 
2300 Washington Street, Boston MA.  02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9472 
E-mail: 
ffinancestaff@bostonpublicschools.organceo.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 
 
 
 


