Page 1:
 
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
NUMBER: 
FIN-10 
Version 01 
 
GRANTS GUIDELINES 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
 
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS GRANTS 
All grants going to the Boston Public Schools — to the district as 
a whole, individual schools, or central offices — must adhere to 
federal, state, city, and district policy. This circular contains the 
grant management standards and procedures the district uses to 
ensure all funds are lawfully expended. 
Based on the funding source, grants will be housed in either the 
Office of Grants and External Funding or the Boston Educational 
Development Foundation (BEDF). All federal and state grants, as 
well as some private grants, are housed in the Office of Grants 
and External Funding and must adhere to the following 
information. Private grants that are housed in the Boston 
Educational Development Foundation (BEDF) 501c3 account 
must adhere to the rules and regulations of BEDF. Information on 
BEDF can be found in Superintendent’s Circular FIN-09.  
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
All grants must adhere to federal, state, city, and Boston Public 
Schools requirements for purchasing, accounting, auditing, civil 


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 2 of 14 
 
rights, access, and confidentiality, as well as established 
guidelines set forth by the funder. Regulations for state and 
federal grants are published in the Grants Management 
Procedural Manual published by the Bureau of Grants 
Management of the Massachusetts Department of Education. All 
federal grants must comply with EDGAR 2 C.F.R.§ 200. All policies 
and procedures, as well as internal controls and grant 
management standards used by the BPS to ensure that all funds 
are lawfully expended are outlined in the Fiscal Policies and 
Procedures Manual. 
Any individual who works under a grant, expends grant funds, or 
oversees a department that utilizes grant funds is responsible for 
lawfully expending grant funds. 
GRANT GUIDELINES FOR GRANTS IN THE OFFICE OF GRANTS 
AND EXTERNAL FUNDING 
The following documents are required when seeking grant 
funding: 
• Intent to Apply Form 
• School Committee Approval Form 
• Boston Fiscal Policies and Procedures 
• Grants Subrecipient and Responsibilities  
Program managers and grant applicants are responsible for 
implementing the following rules for seeking and managing 
grants: 
1. Most federal and state grants follow the ‘supplement and 
not supplant’ rule. This means grant money must not be 
used to replace positions previously funded with local 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 3 of 14 
 
money and should not be used to fund non-salary items 
that are the responsibility of the local school district. For 
example, grant funds may not be used to fund classroom 
teachers or administrative personnel, as these positions are 
considered core. A clear indication of supplanting is shifting 
a position from GSP to a grant. 
2. Grant-funded programs should be self-sufficient. Awarded 
funds must cover all expenses of the program, including 
wages, benefits, supplies, transportation, utilities, custodial 
requirements, and fees. Please consult the Office of Grants 
and External Funding and the Budget Office for approval of 
any exceptions. If technology is involved, applicants should 
consult with the Office of Information and Instructional 
Technology (OIIT) to ensure that they are in support of the 
proposal. 
3. All BPS policies, procedures, rules, and regulations apply to 
grant- funded programs. Regular personnel, budget, and 
business procedures apply to grant funded programs in the 
same way they apply to locally funded programs. Please 
reference appropriate budget, business, and human capital 
memoranda for rules and procedures. 
4. No agreement to apply for or be a subrecipient of a grant is 
to be entered into with an outside organization or entity on 
behalf of the district without the approval of the Grants and 
External Funds Office. 
PRE-AWARD 
All BPS staff, parents, and partners are encouraged to seek and 
apply for grant opportunities from a variety of sources. Grant 
development should be a team process within the 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 4 of 14 
 
department/school to enable those individuals who will 
ultimately be responsible for implementing the grant to be 
involved. Heads of school, principals, and other administrative 
heads must be aware and pre-approve grant proposals for 
programs that will take place under their supervision. 
INTENT TO APPLY 
All BPS entities planning to pursue a grant opportunity must 
submit an online Intent to Apply form for all federal and state 
grants, as well as private grants over $10,000. The Intent to Apply 
form should be submitted as soon as the funding opportunity 
and applicant have been identified, but no less than 3 weeks 
before the grant due date. This will ensure that potential grant 
applications are consistent with BPS goals and policies and are 
not in conflict with BPS solicitations for funds to the same 
agencies and donors. 
Your intent to apply will be reviewed on a weekly basis. Upon 
approval, you will receive a completed Grant Cover Page with 
your submitted information and details on next steps. 
Superintendent Signature 
The Office of Grants and External Funding will facilitate obtaining 
the superintendent’s signature on your behalf. Please submit the 
Intent to Apply form, and the Office of Grants and External 
Funding will contact you within ten (10) days with next steps. All 
documents requiring signature (including electronic signature) 
must be submitted at least one week (7 days) before they are 
due. All proposals must be submitted through the Intent to Apply 
form and obtain approval to move forward from the Grants 
Review Team before signatures will be obtained. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 5 of 14 
 
Letter of Support 
The Office of Grants and External Funding will facilitate and 
obtain all signatures on letters of support from the 
superintendent and mayor (for federal grants). Once the Intent to 
Apply has been reviewed and approved by the Grants Review 
Team, please draft a letter of support for signature. All letters 
requiring signature must be submitted at least one week (7 days) 
before they are due. 
If you are requesting a letter of support from BPS not tied to a 
BPS grant application, please complete the online Letter of 
Support Request Form. The Office of Grants and External 
Funding will follow up with next steps. 
BUDGET CREATION 
The Office of Grants and External Funding can assist with 
developing and reviewing your application’s budget. Once you 
complete the online Intent to Apply Form, the Office of Federal 
and Grants will contact you. Please reply to this communication 
to schedule time to create and review your budget. All budgets 
must adhere to BPS, state, and federal regulations and budgets 
that do not adhere will need to be amended before BPS will 
approve or allow spending. 
SUPERINTENDENT SIGNATURE 
All grant applications that will be submitted to external funders 
(private, state, and federal) must have internal BPS approval prior 
to submission. The Office of Grants and External Funding will 
facilitate this process. 
After completing the Intent to Apply form, the Office of Grants 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 6 of 14 
 
and External Funding will contact you with next steps. All 
documents requiring signature (including electronic signature) 
must be submitted at least one week (7 days) before they are 
due. The superintendent is the only authorized representative 
who can sign grant proposals on behalf of BPS. 
BPS can submit the grant to the funder on the requester’s behalf. 
In some cases, grants can also be submitted directly from the 
program manager, if so preferred, but only after all prior steps are 
completed. 
ONCE GRANT HAS BEEN AWARDED 
School Committee Approval 
All grants being managed through the Office of Grants and 
External Funding must be approved by the School Committee 
before they can be officially accepted by BPS. Similarly, the 
School Committee’s approval is required before the Office of 
Grants and External Funding can gain access to the grant funds 
in conjunction with City Hall. Therefore, as soon as a grant 
application has been submitted, the grant may be submitted for 
School Committee approval. 
To obtain School Committee approval, three steps must be 
completed: 
1. A packet of School Committee materials is submitted to the 
Office of Federal and State Grants. This packet includes a 
complete School Committee Acceptance Form, the full 
grant budget, the grant narrative, the signed cover page (if 
available), MOA/MOU (if available), and award letter (if 
available). This must be submitted no later than 14 days prior 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 7 of 14 
 
to any School Committee meeting. 
2. A meeting is held between the program manager and the 
Office of Grants and External Funding. 
3. The program manager attends the School Committee 
meeting, answering any questions that may arise 
surrounding the grant. 
Once the grant has been approved by the School Committee, 
official confirmation of the School Committee acceptance will be 
sent out to the requester via email approximately 2 days after the 
School Committee vote. 
Please contact Coordinator, Office of Grants and External 
Funding at finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org,  with any 
questions about or requests for School Committee approval. 
Grant Set-up 
Once a ‘notice of payment’ (official award letter from grantor), 
funding wire or MOA/executed contract has been received by the 
Office of Grants and External Funding and the grant has received 
School Committee approval, the grant set-up process will begin. 
During the set-up process, the Office of Grants and External 
Funding will map the submitted budget to the BAIS 
Financials/PeopleSoft system. The grant will be set up according 
to the budget that was approved by the funder. Once the budget 
is set up within BPS, it is set up in the City of Boston’s system. The 
Office of Grants and External Funding will alert program 
managers once this occurs and spending may then begin. This 
process takes approximately eight days from the date the 
payment notice is received. For questions on grant set up, please 
contact the coordinator of Federal and State Grants, Carlos 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 8 of 14 
 
Coordinator, Office of Grants and External Funding (finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org). 
GRANT SPENDING 
Grant Monitoring and Spending 
It is the responsibility of the program manager to monitor the 
spending of the grant. This includes: assuring that the grant 
funds are being used for allowable expenses; spending according 
to the grant timeline; working closely with the Business Office to 
process any contracts and/or procurement needs; entering all 
requisitions; monitoring purchase orders; entering receipt for 
goods/services; and submitting invoices to Accounts Payable for 
all work orders related to their budgeted grant funds. It is the 
responsibility of the program manager’s supervisor to assure 
these responsibilities are fully completed according to 
requirements and to offer assistance, when necessary. 
Throughout the life of a grant, the budget may need to be 
adjusted. This is done through budget transfers in the BAIS 
Financials system. Changes may be made among grant lines but 
not into or out of a grant to make changes to the grand total. 
Changes to the initial grant intent are NOT allowable. 
Before any changes are made to the approved grant budget, 
approval should be obtained from the funder. An amendment 
may be required. If so, the Office of Grants and External Funding 
will help with completing and filing the amendment. Please 
contact Carlos Martinez, Coordinator of Federal and State Grants, 
regarding amendments. 


Page 9:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 9 of 14 
 
Subrecipient Monitoring and Spending 
In accordance with the Uniform Grant Guidance, all sub awards 
— where BPS is serving as the pass-through entity — must be 
clearly identified and managed according to the standards set 
forth by Federal Regulations,  2 CFR 200.331. The program 
manager is responsible for communicating federal regulations 
and assuring that subrecipients adhere to sub-award regulations. 
Please contact the Office of Grants and External Funding for 
more information about subrecipient monitoring. 
Grant Spending Reports 
Program managers will receive quarterly spend-down reports 
from the Office of Grants and External Funding. The report is 
designed to provide a high-level overview of spending, as well as 
spending details. It is the responsibility of program managers to 
look through the report, identify any errors in spending, and 
report back any programmatic changes that may have affected 
the budget timeline. 
Amendments 
An amendment is necessary when there is a modification to the 
scope or finances of a previously approved grant application. 
When the scope of a project changes significantly or the 
expenditure of a budgeted category exceeds a variance of 10% or 
$10,000, whichever is greater, an amendment is needed. 
Amendments should be submitted at least 30 days prior to the 
desired change. Most federal and state grants require a final 
amendment to be filed no later than 30 days prior to the end of 
the grant. The Office of Grants and External Funding will submit 
any amendments necessary but will need justification from the 


Page 10:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 10 of 14 
 
Program Manager on why the changes occurred. 
GRANT CLEAN UP AND CLOSE OUT 
Grant Clean-up 
In the final weeks of the grant, clean-up must occur for most 
grants. To close out a grant and file a final amendment, there 
may not be any remaining requisitions, and all purchase orders 
must be fully received. It is the responsibility of the program 
manager to assure that the grant is clean for close and final 
reports. 
Prior to the grant end date, all requisitions must either be 
canceled or converted to purchase orders. All purchase orders 
must be fully received in BAIS financials by the grant end date. If 
a purchase order will not be paid in full, the remainder must be 
canceled prior the grant end date. It is the responsibility of the 
program manager to monitor clean up, work with the Business 
Office to convert requisitions, cancel POs, and enter receipts for 
goods and services. 
Stipend requests (PS08s) must be submitted and approved 
before stipend work can be performed. Final stipend paperwork 
(PS09s) must be submitted within two weeks of the stipend 
period ending, hence no later than two weeks of the grant end 
date. Failure to purchase items or submit stipend requests by the 
above deadlines may result in forfeiting of funds. 
Grant Outcomes Reporting 
At the conclusion of each grant, program managers must report 
the outcomes of their SMART goals presented to the School 
Committee. The Office of Grants and External Funding will reach 


Page 11:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 11 of 14 
 
out to program managers for this information. This report will be 
shared with the School Committee and key stakeholders. 
Grant Close 
Grant funds must be spent prior to the grant end date. Funds not 
utilized by this end date will be forfeited. For grant compliance 
purposes, only funds that are encumbered — as defined by being 
on a purchase order and fully received in BAIS financials — or 
expended by the grant end date can be claimed under the grant. 
The program manager is responsible for assuring that this occurs 
by the grant end date. 
FISCAL REPORTING 
All fiscal reporting will be completed by, or must be reviewed by, 
the Office of Grants and External Funding/Auditing Department. 
No fiscal report may be submitted to the funder without review 
by the Office of Grants and External Funding/Auditing 
Department. 
FINAL REPORTS 
Final financial reports will be completed by the Auditing 
Department. Final reports are due to the funder 60 days after the 
grant closes. To assure that a final report is filed on time, all 
requisitions and open purchase orders should be cleaned up as 
soon as possible after the grant end date. Once the final report 
has been completed and submitted, a copy will be sent to the 
program manager for record-keeping purposes. 
MULTI-YEAR GRANTS 
Multi-year or continuing federal and state grant accounts must 


Page 12:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 12 of 14 
 
be established at the start of each fiscal year. Accounts are not 
automatically opened or carried forward from year to year. 
Therefore, responsible administrative heads, department 
managers, and relevant program managers should share, on an 
annual basis, all award notification from their respective funders 
with the Office of Grants and External Funding 
PROGRAMMATIC REPORTING 
Programmatic grant reports are the responsibility of the program 
manager who is supervising the grant implementation. Please 
share all such completed reports with the Office of Grants and 
External Funding. Grant-related financial reports and requests for 
revenue are managed by the BPS Business Office. However, 
please share any relevant details for these well in advance, with 
Director of State & Federal Grants (finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org) and/or Coordinator, Office of 
Grants and External Funding (finance-
staff@bostonpublicschools.org), so they can be submitted to the 
funder by the intended deadline. 
 


Page 13:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 13 of 14 
 
GRANTS MANAGEMENT RESOURCES 
Grants Website 
The Office of Grants and External Funding provides information 
about grants at BPS, resources for finding grant opportunities, 
contact information, process and policy information, the 
quarterly newsletters, and constant updates that may impact 
grants. 
Internal Grants Management Library 
This internal resource provides detailed information about 
managing a grant in BPS. This searchable and constantly 
updated document includes common grant application answers, 
key application documents, how-to guides on running common 
reports, and step-by-step instructions on how to manage a 
budget, contact information, and information on how to perform 
most grant activities in BPS. 
CONTACT INFORMATION FOR OFFICE OF GRANTS AND 
EXTERNAL FUNDING 
Director of State & Federal Grants  
617-635-9577 
Email: finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Senior Grants Manager 
617-635-8582 
Email: finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
 
 


Page 14:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-10 
Page 14 of 14 
 
 
Coordinator, Office of Grants and External Funding 617-635-9084 
Email: finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Accounting Coordinator 
617-635-9466 
Email: TBD 
 
External Funding Analyst - Please see Superintendent’s Circular 
FIN-04, Student Activity Accounts. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Director of State & Federal Grants 
Department: 
Director of Grants and External Funding, Finance 
Mailing 
Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington St., 
Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9577 
Email: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
 
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


