Page 1:
 
 
Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
FIN-21 
Version 01 
 
CREATING A BPS-RECOGNIZED INDEPENDENT 501C3 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
The Boston Public Schools encourages schools to seek and 
receive external resources to supplement their instructional and 
programmatic strategies. To this end, the Boston Public Schools 
has partnered with the Boston Educational Development Fund 
(BEDF) to serve as a 501c3 fiscal agent to receive financial 
donations as charitable contributions, eligible for tax deductions 
by the donor. Independently, as a fiscal partner to schools, BEDF 
manages funds, creates financial reports, and offers technical 
assistance to schools in their pursuits of private funds. BPS 
schools are entitled to utilize BEDF as a fiscal agent in pursuit of 
private funding.  
In the case that a school wishes to pursue establishing and 
managing an independent 501c3, formal approval is required.  
SCHOOLS WITH EXISTING INDEPENDENT 501C3S 
Schools with existing 501c3s, registered with the proper federal 
and state authorizing agencies, must complete the BPS 
Independent 501c3 Form to update BPS on current details 
including board structure, status, and operating revenue. 
Independent 501c3s with strong governance boards and rationale 
will receive recognition from BPS.  


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-21 
Page 2 of 3 
 
SCHOOLS SEEKING TO ESTABLISH A BPS-RECOGNIZED 
INDEPENDENT 501C3 
To request to establish a 501c3, all schools must have the 
following: 
• A strong rationale for the need for a separate, independent 
501c3. 
• A draft plan for the 501c3 including governance board. 
• A track record of managing private investments 
appropriately and on-time reporting OR someone on the 
governing board with this experience. 
• An estimate of anticipated annual revenue and revenue 
sources. 
For a school to establish a 501c3, the following outlined steps 
must be completed, and approval given by the superintendent:  
• All schools must complete a BPS Independent 501c3 . 
• Submitted requests will be reviewed by the chief financial 
officer and superintendent and approved if a strong 
application is submitted.  
COMPLIANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY 
BPS reserves the right to alert foundations/nonprofit partners to 
the existence of 501c3 that are considered to be out of 
compliance or that have been created without proper approval 
from the Superintendent’s Office. 
BPS believes in the ability to provide timely, accurate, and 
thorough reports to our philanthropic partners and takes 
seriously the significant commitment of time and expertise that 
this places on a school community to run an independent 501c3.  
 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-21 
Page 3 of 3 
 
We encourage the use of our established partner, BEDF, to 
responsibly manage funds. BPS has put these requirements in 
place to ensure proper management of all funds and proper 
reporting, to support schools in philanthropic pursuits, and to 
provide a low-cost 501c3 to house private funding.  
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Chief of Finance 
Department: 
Finance 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building,  
2300 Washington St., Boston, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-7962 
Email: (preferred) finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org 
  
Mary Skipper, Superintendent 


