Page 1:
 
 
 
 Superintendent’s 
Circular 
 NUMBER: 
FIN-01 
Version 01 
 
 
TRAVEL POLICY – PROCEDURES FOR APPROVAL AND 
REIMBURSEMENT 
This circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
Most Boston Public School business is conducted locally, on-line 
or by telephone.  Under some special and limited circumstances, 
overnight or out-of-state travel may be required.  These 
circumstances usually arise if the Boston Public Schools is 
obliged to send staff out-of-state if a strong case can be made 
that such travel would substantially benefit the district. 
In all cases, a request for subsidized travel requires justification, 
prior notification, and prior approval.  BPS is not obligated to 
reimburse any employee for travel costs that were not approved 
according to this policy. 
This Circular will remain in effect unless rescinded or superseded 
by a subsequent version. 
TRAVEL APPROVAL 
1. Applicants must secure approval using the online form; sign 
in here. Directions for this process are in the BPS Travel 
Request documentation document. It is the sole obligation 
of the traveler to determine that sufficient funds are 
available for reimbursement.   


Page 2:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-01 
Page 2 of 8 
 
2. No travel should occur until the traveler receives a fully 
APPROVED travel request.  Any travel request that is 
received AFTER the travel has occurred will NOT be 
reimbursed.   
3. All overnight and out of state travel requires prior approval 
and must be submitted at least 20 days prior to departure 
date.  When you apply, the online form will go through the 
following approvers for signatures: school leader, school 
superintendent/division chief, financial analyst, chief 
financial officer, and operations manager/superintendent.  
The traveler will need to follow their travel approval 
application online in case there is a question that an 
approver may have or a denial which they will note on the 
application.  When the application is approved, you are then 
eligible to travel and receive any reimbursements owed to 
you. 
4. Please note that only these two accounts must be used:  
• 52802 for planes, trains, busses, taxis, Ubers/Lyfts etc. – 
the cost associated with getting there. 
• 52804 for conference fees, hotel, food etc. – the cost 
associated with being there. 
You should also use these two accounts when doing 
requisitions for travel. 
5. Supporting documentation describing the conference and 
the purpose of your attendance must be attached to the 
online travel request form with any other pertinent 
information. 
6. All staff planning to attend an overnight or out-of-town 
conference are required upon their return to prepare a 


Page 3:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-01 
Page 3 of 8 
 
report of the presentations/workshops, etc., attended and to 
submit their report to their immediate supervisor, who shall 
determine the format of this report. 
7. If travel is being paid for by the conference host, the BPS 
Employee Disclosure Form (3 pages) must be attached to 
your “Travel Approval Form” application. 
REIMBURSEMENT OF TRAVEL EXPENSES 
To secure prompt reimbursement for travel, reimbursement 
requests must be submitted to the Business Office within fifteen 
(15) business days after the travel has occurred.  The traveler must 
submit the following forms, documentation/receipts to Accounts 
Payable, Office of the Business Manager (emails accepted): 
1. A completed City of Boston Special Draft/Non Order Form, 
filled out completely with: 
• School/department 
• Date 
• Full name of person being reimbursed 
• Full address of person being reimbursed 
• Vendor # (see NOTE below) 
• Funding source 
• Full detailed description: name of conference, dates, and 
place/state where held 
• Amount being reimbursed 
• Signed by the employee’s immediate supervisor. 
2. A copy of City of Boston and County of Suffolk Travel Expense 
Voucher (attached).  This form must be filled out completely 
with each daily expense, then signed on the lower right by 
the person taking the trip and on the lower left by the 
department head. 


Page 4:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-01 
Page 4 of 8 
 
3. The “Certification Form” attesting, under the pains and 
penalties of perjury, that the requested reimbursement was 
incurred as reasonable expenses in the service of the City of 
Boston. 
4. A copy of the approved Request for Travel Approval form 
MUST be attached. 
IMPORTANT NOTES: 
BPS does not reimburse taxes for expenditures.  BPS will 
reimburse taxes and tips on FOOD ONLY. 
Reimbursements cannot exceed the amount authorized by the 
Superintendent.  Only in extreme conditions can this original 
amount be increased via an amended travel form which must be 
submitted to the Finance Office prior to travel.   
If travel substitution occurs, an amended form approved by the 
Superintendent is required before travel.  A copy of the “Travel 
Approval” must be submitted with each request for 
reimbursement. 
REMINDER:  You must be registered on the City of Boston 
Vendor/Supplier Portal file to be reimbursed.  Go to 
www.boston.gov/procurement, click on "Go to Supplier Portal," 
and follow the instructions.  Wait until you are an approved 
vendor and have acquired your vendor number before 
submitting for reimbursement. 
If submitting by paper: 
• ONLY submit single-sided reimbursements packet – not 
double-sided.   
• 12-point font or larger on 8.5 x 11 white paper. 


Page 5:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-01 
Page 5 of 8 
 
• DO NOT highlight or put scotch tape on receipts because 
it fades the receipts; use staples. Only legible receipts will 
be reimbursed. Must submit copies of all cash register 
receipts on 8.5 x 11 paper. 
ALLOWABLE EXPENSES 
1. Economy class commercial carrier charges (airlines, trains, 
buses) are to be used at all times.   The maximum 
reimbursement will be limited to the lowest commercial 
carrier fare to the destination.  The maximum limitation 
does not apply for in-state travel. 
2. Hotel charges are limited to $200.00 per night.  Exceptions 
to this limit will only be approved if: 
a) basic accommodations are unavailable, or 
b) basic accommodations are too distant from the event, 
or 
c) the event is being held at a specific hotel. 
3. The purchase of meals will be reimbursed when supported 
by original receipts, not to exceed $50.00 per day.  A 
maximum of $25.00 per day will be allowed without 
receipts.  Each person traveling must pay for their own 
meals (NOT other individuals or group meals) unless 
otherwise noted on the Travel Approval Request; the name 
of each individual must be listed on the Travel Approval 
Request prior to travel. 
a) Gratuities cannot exceed 20%. 
b) Original receipts must include an itemized breakdown 
of what was ordered.  If an itemized breakdown is not 
provided, the $25.00 per-diem allowance will be 
reimbursed. 
c) Reimbursement for room service also requires the 
submission of an itemized breakdown. 


Page 6:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-01 
Page 6 of 8 
 
4. Conference registration fees must be supported by original 
documentation.     
LOCAL TRANSPORTATION CHARGES 
1. Car rentals/gas and airport parking must be listed on the 
“Travel Approval” if reimbursement is to be requested.   
2. Charges claimed for taxis/Lyfts/Ubers must be supported by 
original receipts. 
3. Travel by automobile is eligible for reimbursement at the 
current IRS allowable rate per mile (see Superintendent’s 
Circular FIN-02 – Mileage) 
4. Tolls and parking charges must be supported by original 
receipts. 
MISCELLANEOUS TRAVEL ISSUES 
1. Travel by City Contractors/Vendors.  Some contracts and/or 
service agreements may require the vendor to travel on 
behalf of the Boston Public Schools.  The City of Boston 
Travel Policy must be incorporated by reference into the 
contract/agreements prior to execution.  
2. Conflicting Obligations.  It is generally not permissible, 
without the prior review and approval of the Office of Legal 
Advisor, to engage in travel sponsored by a third party. 
IMPORTANT REMINDER 
The Fiscal School Year ends on June 30 each year and July 1 starts 
the new Fiscal School Year. You cannot use current school year 
funds to pay for prior school year expenses. 
 


Page 7:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-01 
Page 7 of 8 
 
Reimbursements that are not submitted within the School Fiscal 
Year will be in jeopardy of non-payment. 
 
For more information about this circular, contact: 
Owner: 
Principal Account Clerk Accounts Payable 
Business Services 
Department: 
Operations 
Mailing Address: 
Bruce C. Bolling Building, 2300 Washington 
Street, Roxbury, MA 02119 
Phone: 
617-635-9472 
Email: 
finance-staff@bostonpublicschools.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 8:
Superintendent’s Circular FIN-01 
Page 8 of 8 
 
CITY OF BOSTON AND COUNTY OF SUFFOLK 
TRAVEL EXPENSE VOUCHER 
THIS FORM IS SUBMITTED WITH REIMBURSEMENT RECEIPTS 
TO THE AUDITING DEPARTMENT (Business Office). 
ORIGINAL TO BE FILED IN AUDITOR'S OFFICE 
 
 
Month of: 
      
 
 
Name of Official or Employee:  
Department and Unit: Boston Public Schools 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Day 
Description 
PRIVATE 
AUTOMOBILE 
Rail-
Road 
Fares 
Bus Taxi and 
other fares 
 
Meals 
 
HOTEL 
Tele-
phone 
& Tele-
graph 
All Other 
TOTAL 
 
 
Miles 
Amount 
 
 
Break
-fast 
Lunch 
Dinner 
 
 
Item 
Amount 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOTALS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By signing this voucher you certify that each item of expenditure was incurred and was necessary in the service of the City or County 
and complies with the regulations on the back of this voucher. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I hereby certify that I have personally examined this statement, that I approve of each item of 
expense hereon, that each item conforms to the regulations printed on the back, the amounts 
charged are reasonable and the expenditures necessary in the service of the City or County. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature 
 
 
 
Signature 
 
 
 
Department Head 
 
 
 
 
Employee 
 


